---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "On Codes and Ciphers; The Imitation Game"
author: udayon.sen
cover: enigma-decryption.JPG
pic1: Alan_Turing_Aged_16.jpg
pic2: enigma-machine.jpg
pic3: caesar-cipher-left-shift-of-3.jpg
pic4: International_Morse_Code.svg
tags: culture
date: 2019-07-12 17:45
link: https://media.defense.gov/2007/Sep/18/2000450326/-1/-1/0/070918-F-1234S-006.JPG
---
“Are you paying attention? Good. If you are not listening carefully, you will
miss things, important things. I will not pause, I will not repeat myself, and
you will not interrupt me. You think that because you're sitting where you are
and I am sitting where I am, that you are in control of what is about to happen.
You're mistaken. I am in control, because I know things that you do not know.” - *The Imitation Game*, 2014.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a1/Alan_Turing_Aged_16.jpg" ><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

Alan Turing was a revolutionary mathematician, a pioneer among computer
scientists and, most importantly, one of the key players in resolving World War
II through his immense contribution to the decoding of the Enigma cipher. The
Allied forces were in a near-constant state of perplexion over how to crack the
Enigma, the cipher used by the Germans, in order to encrypt messages. Though the
Enigma was reported to have been decoded by the Polish well before him, Turing’s
original method of decrypting the cipher was instrumental in predicting German
movements during the War.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/_dchris/19612913884" ><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic2 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

The Enigma was believed to be impossible to crack. Ultimately, however, it was
broken, bearing testimony to how nothing is truly unbreakable, and every system
has a catch attached to it; a principle well highlighted by modern cryptologists
like Shamir and Bonhe.

The conceptualisation of codes and ciphers is well-documented alongside the
history of warfare and the development of language, as we know it. A very famous
cipher, the Caesar Cipher, was supposedly used by the famous Roman general to
communicate messages from one camp to another whilst maintaining the
authenticity of commands. In the cipher, the first letter of the alphabet is
replaced with any chosen letter, the subsequent letters then get replaced in a
similar order. For example, in the ‘G Cipher’, A gets replaced by G, B gets
replaced by H and so on.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://s4scoding.com/images/caesar-cipher-left-shift-of-3.jpg" ><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic3 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>


One of the key aspects of codes and ciphers comes from the concept of
steganography. Even though steganography is considered to be a part of
cryptology, it actually isn’t, it is simply a method of hiding information,
using pictures. This method is said to be foolproof. It was even used in the
very famous or rather infamous case of Cicada 3301, when an unknown group of
people claimed to hide information within certain images, and challenged someone
to crack it.

Another prominent cipher is the Vigenere Cipher; a key-controlled Caesar Cipher.
A key is a system through which one can encode or decode anything, like messages
or warnings. Vigenere Ciphers have been instrumental during war communication
even during the era of the Napoleonic Wars and have stood the test of time, 
being one of the most recognisable of ciphers today. However, the claim to the
throne of the most illustrious cipher would, undisputedly, go to the Morse Code.
The concept behind the Morse Code, (which despite the misnomer of being a code,
is actually a cipher) is also behind the invention of the telegraph by, you
guessed it, Samuel Morse.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b5/International_Morse_Code.svg" ><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic4 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

For almost half a century, the Telegraph was the only means by which electronic
messages could be sent and received. The Morse Code expresses words, i.e. the
letters and numbers that constitute them, in the form of ‘dots and dashes’ and
it is in this form that it is sent to the receiver. Morse Code, however, has
been, quite interestingly, used in several other forms such as taps and untaps;
tapping signifying a dot, and pausing a dash. (Yes, Sherlock fans, you guessed
it, didn’t you)? The Morse Code is quite a reliable form of masking data, if
masked properly that is.

Funny enough, codes and ciphers have been an integral part of artistic movements
in Europe. One of the most renowned ciphers was developed by one of the most
talented men in Europe. Although his name is obscure, he is considered to have
talent comparable to the likes of Leonardo Da Vinci. Most of the relics of that
age have been protected using this very cipher. The cipher in question is the
Alberti Cipher, conceptualised by the revolutionary, Alberti. This cipher
replaces words according to a disk which helps encrypt and decrypt the text.

The famous author David Kahn notes in his book *The Codebreakers* that history
has forgotten several of the other famous ciphers, such as the ones used by many
mathematicians in the Middle-East during the Oriental age, the Scytale Cipher
used by the Spartans during their Golden Age, and so on. There has been no
dearth in the human ability to innovate. In order to create a foolproof cipher
system, all has been done, ranging from methods of transposition (that is to
replace one word with another, as was utilised by the famous Gronsfeld Cipher)
to the generation of intelligent schemes to make decryption difficult without
the key.

However, when the Enigma was built, it was almost as if the pinnacle of human
comprehension was reached and it was presumed that it could not be broken, no
matter what the Allies did. However, a group of people in Bletchley Park refused
to give up and the rest, as they say, is history. Alan Turing has been an
inspiration for the greatest of modern cryptographers, from Adi Shamir to
Malcolm Williamson. In an age in which it is predicted that computers might rule
the world, the authenticity of information and security are some of the biggest
concerns. Cryptography and its application are only going to get more complex
and esoteric, to the extent that we may not be able to comprehend even abstract
concepts on the quantum nature of information.

Information, they say, is key. The philosophy behind the establishment, setting
up and the consequent breaking of codes signifies the ultimate nature of how we
are. It signifies the essence of humankind. It is in the nature of man to build
and then eventually destroy, to construct and then ultimately deconstruct, only
for a better possibility to be explored. Human nature tells us that nothing is
truly unbreakable and that everything, which is part of human effort, can be
brought down, thanks to humans themselves.

Codes help us express ourselves in a niche manner, truly being an indication of
the creativity and perseverance, we as humans, are able to display and put into
effect.
