---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "How to Talk About Islam"
author: soham.gupta
cover: 
tags: society
date: 2019-04-25 14:05
link:
---

There is no doubt that Islam is by far the most powerful religion in the world
today. With a presence on almost every continent inhabited by man, a powerful
theocratic political influence in countries dominated by its adherents, a
rapidly increasing immigrant population in post-Christian European countries, an
ever-strengthening missionary influence, and a global following of more than a
billion people, it has come to influence much of the modern world. In 2008, the
Vatican revealed that Muslims have overtaken Catholics as far as the number of
members is concerned.

As such, it is no longer possible for people to simply ignore the Islamic
phenomenon, no matter what their opinion of it might be. The reason is that
Islam is quite unavoidable. There is hardly a place on earth when the *adhan*
cannot be heard. There is a hardly a skyline which does not have a minaret
reaching up to the heavens. No matter where you go, Islam is there.

As a convert from Hinduism to orthodox Catholicism, there is much in Islam that
I admire, despite the deeply troubled history that my Church has shared with the
followers of Muhammad. I deeply admire, for instance, Islam’s teachings on
modesty. I am appreciative of many of the values which Islam inculcates in its
adherents – the devotion to one’s parents and the respect for elders.
Catholicism and Islam both profess to be monotheistic and eschew the joining of
partners with Almighty God, although our views about the nature of Almighty God
are radically different. And it goes without saying that I condemn any and all
forms of violence, hatred, and bigotry towards Muslims on the basis of their
religious affiliation as unethical, immoral and – above all – un-Christian.

However, there are also elements in Islam that I find deeply troubling. Now,
notice that I use the word “elements in Islam”, rather than simply “Islam”.
After all, there are many different groups that profess to be Muslim and which
have different interpretations of Islam. For instance, the Ahmadiyya Muslim
Community is entirely pacifistic in nature and condemns any and all forms of
religious terrorism. There are also many Sufis, Salafis, and mainstream Sunnis
who have condemned violence against non-Muslims and advocate a more apolitical
form of Islam.

I acknowledge and respect the fact that the texts which *seem* to call for
violence – in the Quran and the Hadith – are open to interpretation. As such, it
is not my intention to paint all Muslims with a broad brush, or to pretend that
Islam is monolithic. Just as it would be disingenuous for someone to paint my
faith or any other faith with gross overgeneralizations, so would be to do the
same with Islam. However, there are certainly some trends in the modern media
that are problematic and need to be addressed.

There is a tendency (among many secularists, liberals and the left-leaning) to
classify all critics of Islam as part of the far-right. This is not only
inaccurate, but also extremely dangerous, and contrary to the principle of the
freedom of expression. The act of criticising a particular
ideology/proposition/belief system is not the same as advocating violence,
hatred, discrimination or bigotry against proponents of that
ideology/proposition/belief system

Yes, it is true that all those who advocate violence against proponents of a
particular ideology/proposition/belief system also happen to be critics of that
particular ideology/proposition/belief system. But not all who criticise the
ideology/proposition/belief system are calling for violence against proponents
of that ideology/proposition/belief system.

To give an example from everyday life: all oranges are fruits, but not all
fruits are oranges.

Oranges might be bad, and all oranges might be fruits, but the fact that all
oranges are bad does not imply that all fruits are bad, even though all oranges
are fruits. This is because of the very simple fact that there are some fruits
which are not oranges. In other words, all anti-Muslim bigots are critics of
Islam, but not all critics of Islam are anti-Muslim bigots.

Consider, for example, the case of David Wood, a convert from atheism to
Christianity. Wood is a fairly prominent critic of Islam. He has criticised the
teachings of Islam as inherently violent, the founder of Islam as an immoral
man, and the claims of Islam as intellectually deficient. However, I am yet to
come across a single video in which he has called for hatred against Muslims. On
the contrary, I follow him regularly and can testify that, as far as I can see,
he has nothing in his heart but love for Muslims, whom he believes to be in
error. This he has demonstrated on numerous occasions in many ways. One of the
best examples I can give is when he actually attempted to meet with someone who
had threatened to kill him. He recorded the occasion on camera when he visited
the agreed-upon venue and found that his would-be assassin hadn’t turned up.

As a professed Christian evangelist, Wood's goal is not to spread bigotry
against Muslims, but to show Muslims (what he considers to be) the defects in
Islam, and to invite them to (what he believes to be) a better way:
Christianity.

But what has been the response to his criticism? Intelligent, counter-critiques
from Muslims? On occasion, yes, as we see in the case of the Islamic scholar
(and gentleman) Shabir Ally who has debated him on numerous occasions and who
has always treated him with dignity, respect, and goodwill. However, much of the
backlash against his work has been neither intelligent, nor reasoned, nor
humane. Much of the responses to his criticism include death threats and the
mockery of his disabled children.

Of course, not every Muslim has responded in this manner. Of course, there are
many Muslims who would consider such barbaric behaviour to be un-Islamic. Of
course, such aforementioned peaceful Muslims may (and probably do) have peaceful
interpretations of Islam. But what we must realise is that there is a powerful
party within the religion of Islam which is violent, intolerant of criticism,
aggressively imperialist and which bases their beliefs not on political
convictions but on religiously motivated interpretations of Quranic and Hadithic
texts. And it is these hyper-fundamentalists who are making use of the
atmosphere of ‘tolerance’ and political correctness to advance an agenda that is
diabolical and toxic. Attempts to suppress peaceful, intelligent critics of
Islam is not ‘tolerance’. It is intolerance. And such attempts play right into
the hands of the Islamists.

The interesting thing that we see in the case of Wood is that a number of these
internet jihadis have started false-flagging his content. The shocking result
has been that Facebook has notified him that some of his posts “go against”
their community guidelines. These include posts in which Wood simply informed
his audiences of the most recent threats he had gotten from jihadis! Not a
single one of them included a call to violence, but only an appeal to keep-up
the criticism and satire.

It seems, at times, that the people running Facebook have an extremely warped
idea of what hate speech is. Criticising an ideology as intellectually and
morally deficient is *not* hate speech, but threatening someone for making those
criticisms certainly is. Indeed, as I have been at pains to emphasise: we have
to love our Muslim friends, condemn acts of violence against Muslims and fight
anti-Muslim discrimination. But that doesn't mean we must be naïve and pretend
that Islam is a wholly pacifistic religion and that all the IS terrorists are
merely politically-motivated people using religion as a cover to gain support
for their cause. Such an analysis is not only painfully ignorant of the facts,
but is also dangerous since it encourages complacency against what is clearly a
rising tide of religiously-motivated Islamic fundamentalism in the world today.

Should we similarly pretend that the founder of Islam was a feminist and a
pacifist? No. If the historical evidence does not indicate that he was such, we
should not pretend that he was such. We should portray him in as historically
accurate a manner as possible – even if that portrayal is deemed offensive and
blasphemous by violent cyber-jihadists who have only one goal: the violent
promulgation of a religious system and the suppression of all criticism of it.

There are many peaceful, kind, gentlemanly and dignified people in the Muslim
community who would consider themselves orthodox and who would, in fact, agree
with what I am saying today. Yet, that still begs the question: how *should* we
talk about Islam? We should seek to honestly evaluate the religion itself. But
how should we judge what the religion is? There are peaceful Muslims and violent
Muslims, just as there are peaceful Christians and violent Christians. Which are
the true followers, and which are more influenced by other ideologies rather
than the doctrine itself?

In my experience (having extensively and intensively studied religion for around
ten years now), we should always judge a religion on the basis of its *Sources*
and its *Heroes*.

What do I mean by this?

The *Sources* of a religion are essentially its authorities and/or sources of
doctrine. In Protestant Christianity, the *Source* is Scripture alone, and its
plain perspicuous teaching. In Catholic Christianity, the source is Scripture
and Apostolic Tradition as received and interpreted by the Magisterium (i.e.,
the Church itself).

The *Heroes* of a religion are those figures which have been deemed by the
Sources/Authorities as having followed the religion well (though not necessarily
perfectly, and there are different grades of heroes in every religion). The
ultimate Hero of all Christianity is Jesus Himself, who is believed to be the
perfect man. In Catholicism, the heroes are (to a certain degree) the saints.
Although it is generally agreed that the canonisation process only grants us
certainty that the deceased is in heaven, not that the person always lived an
exemplary life. This gives room for the believing Catholic to criticise even the
acts of saints, as many traditionalists have done with St. Mother Teresa, to
give an example.

In Islam, the greatest hero is Muhammad himself, who is considered to be the
perfect example for all mankind. In Sunni Islam, Muhammad is closely followed by
the Four Rightly Guided Caliphs, whereas in Shia Islam, Muhammad is but one of
Fourteen Infallibles, which include – besides the founder himself – Fatima and
the Twelve Imams.

So, when we judge Islam, we should first distinguish between the various schools
of Islam. Sunni Islam is not the same as Shia Islam or Ibadi Islam or Ahmadi
Islam. There are, so to speak, quite a few ‘Islams’, just as there are different
interpretations of Marxism, democracy, libertarianism, capitalism, feminism and
just about everything else. In other words, the next time you see some act of
violence perpetrated by fundamentalists of any religion or sect, ask yourself
the question: is this act of violence commanded by the Sources of the faith in
question? Is there any precedent for this sort of terror in the behaviour of its
heroes?

You should ask the same question when it comes to the good actions of peaceful
adherents. When you see followers of a religion endorsing pacifism or separation
of religion and state, are they acting faithfully according to their Sources and
Heroes? Or are there more influenced by other ideologies, in light of which they
interpret their religion?

I end this article with a comparison between the Christian Crusades and the
Islamic Mujahideen. The Crusades were an administrative decision, in part made
by the Pope. Catholicism does not require its adherents to consider Papal
administrative decisions as infallible – the only infallible things coming out
of the Pope are his ratifications of ecumenical councils and ex-cathedra
statements; that is to say, matters which *solely* concern doctrine and dogma.

Administrative decisions, as per Catholic ecclesiology, are *entirely* fallible.
As a matter of fact, it is the conservatives in the Church who are very loud in
criticising the administrative decisions of recent Popes, such as the decision
of Pope Paul VI to allow the priest to celebrate the Mass facing the
congregation (*versus populum*) rather than the East (*ad orientem*) as has
traditionally been practised. So, largely, the Crusades are not part of Catholic
doctrine, if at all.

I do not say this in order to “wash my hands clean” of the Crusades, so to
speak. Personally, I think the Crusades had a noble intent in *theory* (i.e.,
that of defending Christendom), but I lament the fact that in *practice* many of
the Crusaders became too extreme. Rather than simply defeating enemy military
forces, they committed unspeakable atrocities upon civilians which are
horrendous, lamentable and condemnable. As a traditional and orthodox Catholic,
I am *ashamed* of the misdeeds that were perpetrated in the name of the
Crusades.

But here’s the thing: my religion gives me the liberty to say this. My faith
does not compel me to believe that the Crusaders were “inspired by God”.

But when you study the early Muslim invasions of neighbouring civilisations, ask
yourself the question: can we say the same about Islam? Who led these invasions?
Were these figures deemed by Islam to be inspired by God in their acts and to
be, in some sense, infallible? Do the chief sources command its adherents to
consider their acts of war as virtuous on the part of a ruler? Our judgment of
Islam should be based on these facts. I will leave you to make up your own mind.
It may turn out that, in fact, Islam is an extremely peaceful and humane
religion. Or it may turn out another way.

I only ask you to use sound judgment in your study and to not be afraid of the
truth, however hard it may turn out to be. However, in all our critique or
appraisal, we must remember that our analysis of a doctrine should not seep into
a generalisation of the moral character of the adherents of that doctrine. This
attitude allows me to be extremely kind and respectful to my Muslim friends
while, at the same time, giving me total liberty to analyse and evaluate the
religion as my conscience commands me. And that is how we should talk about
Islam today, condemning it where we see condemnation due, fighting for and
respecting its adherents when they so require, and accepting or rejecting it for
what it is when truth so demands.
