---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Portuguese Drug Decriminalisation – Has it worked?"
author: daniel.harris
cover: 1024px-Amsterdam_rainbow_coffeeshop.jpg
pic1: drug-decriminalisation.png
tags: policy
date: 2019-07-10 16:00
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Amsterdam_rainbow_coffeeshop.jpg/1024px-Amsterdam_rainbow_coffeeshop.jpg
---
In 2001, Portugal became a global leader in the war against drugs when it
decriminalised the possession and consumption of all illegal substances. When
this topic comes up in conversation, most people (especially those from the UK
and the US) are rather shocked when they find out. Two obvious questions then
arise. Firstly, how and why could a traditionally conservative country, tucked
away at the edge of Europe, just decriminalise all drugs? The second question
is, of course, did it work?

**Background to this article**

This article is inspired by a university project that I completed whilst
spending 5 months in Lisbon. The interviews referenced are personal interviews
that I completed in April, 2019. Some have been translated from Portuguese to
English. The three interviews I will reference are of the following people:

**João Santa Maria** – Peer mediator in the NGO IN-Mouraria – a harm reduction
centre for drug users.

**Brendan Hughes** – Principal Scientist and expert in Drug Legislation at the
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction.

**João Goulão** – Director of SICAD, the government department for Intervention
on Addictive Behaviours and Dependencies, and the architect for Portugal’s drug
policy. 

**The History**

Portugal’s decision to decriminalise drugs cannot be understood without first
looking at the recent history of the country. From 1933 to 1974, Portugal was
under the rule of the Estado Novo regime, a right-wing, Catholic, authoritarian
government led by Antonio Salazar. If this name sounds familiar, it’s because it
was the inspiration behind Salazar Slytherin, as J.K. Rowling used to live and
teach in Porto. Portugal was shut off from the outside world, with its only
neighbouring country Spain under a similarly restrictive right-wing
dictatorship, so Portugal “missed out on the experimentation and mind-expanding
culture of the 1960s.” 

When the colonial troops came back from Africa, they brought cannabis with them;
soon after, heroin entered the country. As João Santa Maria explains, “freedom
gave us the right to do whatever we wanted.” However, there would be
consequences to this liberty. By the end of the 90s, heroin addiction, HIV and
Hepatitis C had ravaged the country. In truth, nobody quite knows how many
people were addicted, but it’s estimated that 1 in 10 people were using heroin,
1 in 100 were battling heroin addiction, and HIV rates reached a high of 104.2
new cases per million in 2000. To put that into context, the current HIV rate is
4.2 per million. One of the most important things to understand is that heroin
use was not limited to a certain class of people. Bankers, lawyers, doctors,
teachers; João Goulão remembers how everybody seemed to know a heroin addict. 

Thus, implementing wide-scale change and challenging the social norms of a drug
policy was a far more realistic and achievable task in Portugal than it would be
in the UK or the US today. Furthermore, the policy was not a result of left-wing
liberalisation, as some people might assume. The motivation, as explained, was a
response to a health crisis, not an ideological movement. In 2001, the new
decriminalisation law was implemented and although there have been some small
alterations, it essentially remains the same to this day.

At this point, it is important to address exactly what decriminalisation
actually means. Brendan Hughes has made a very useful video
([www.youtube.com/watch?v9NKhpujqOXc](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v9NKhpujqOXc))
which I highly recommend watching. To explain it briefly, decriminalisation is
**not** the same as legalisation. In the diagram below, taken from Hughes’
video, the red dots indicated illegal activity, and the green dots, legal
activity. Decriminalisation, or a non-criminal offence, does not pass the line
from criminal to legal. It simply becomes an administrative offence, rather than
a criminal one. For example, bad parking is not a criminal offence, but may
still be fined and punished. The same can be said for the possession and
consumption of illegal substances in Portugal.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="javascript:void(0)" ><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%"/></a><b>Image result for drug decriminalisation explained</b></div>

One of the main issues with decriminalisation in Portugal, and across the world,
is that the general public does not seem to understand what it entails. In
Lisbon, this is not helped by the fact that tourist areas are filled with ‘drug
dealers’, who offer unsuspecting tourists cannabis, hashish and cocaine. The
drugs are almost always fake (which is why the police do not intervene), but
this gives visitors the impression that drugs are legal in Portugal which
definitely muddies the water. Another issue is that the concept of
decriminalisation has become incredibly and dangerously politicised. Here is an
extract from my interview with Brendan, wherein he concisely details the issues
with decriminalisation:

*Brendan Hughes: “From what I see, a chunk of it is to with this horrible word
decriminalisation, which evokes so many feelings in different people, despite
the fact that most of them don’t actually know what it is or what it means. They
imagine it to mean something, and therefore either they are greatly in favour of
what they think it means, or they are greatly against. So, they are in favour
because it means people don’t get criminal records, or people get treated and
treated as humans, and they have dignity, and you take the drug users away from
contact with the police or the criminal justice system. And people are against
it because they think that it takes away the threat, and it suggests somehow
society considers that this offence isn’t particularly that bad after all and
therefore it will encourage a bunch of other people to do it - those are the
main arguments. And because neither of them are fully correct - but again,
people don’t really seem to talk so much about the facts.”*

*Me: “And, you know, that decriminalisation doesn’t lead to increased use.”*

*Brendan Hughes: “It doesn’t. We don’t know! It doesn’t lead to anything
predictable.”*

*Me: “It’s not about liberalisation. And I guess I think some people think that
it’s a left-wing policy.”*

*Brendan Hughes: “And that’s what I say. People think it’s a badge, and it’s
either a badge of achievement to say that you’ve done it, or it’s a badge of
achievement to say that you’ve resisted it, when neither side really sees the
full picture.”*

(Extract from my interview with Brendan Hughes).

**The Results**

Beyond the politics, what have been the quantifiable outcomes of the policy?
Well, it is not a simple answer. Statistically speaking, Portugal has
dramatically improved. HIV rates have plummeted, overall drug use is down,
though Hepatitis C and problem drug use are still an issue. If you are caught
with an illegal substance, you are either fined, given a warning, or sent to a
commission. These commissions have the mantra of ‘treatment before punishment’,
and the vast majority of cases are dismissed. If you are a drug addict, then
there is no possibility of a fine, only treatment.

In terms of policing, the local authorities rarely bother anybody on the street,
and it is extremely common to smell cannabis at any time of the day. The
attitude towards drug addicts has also improved, and heroin-assisted treatment
centres, in Lisbon, are finally about to open, having been promised for over two
years. The improvements listed above definitely qualify as drastic progress, in
comparison to where Portugal was in the 80s and the 90s, yet it would be an
oversimplification to credit all of this to decriminalisation. João Goulão has
detailed how they could have done the whole policy without decriminalisation,
and still put in place the social services and commissions that exist today. In
fact, there is definitely a symbolic element to Portuguese decriminalisation;
allowing the Portuguese population the freedoms that they had so badly missed
for the majority of the 20th century. 

Yet, upon speaking to various street teams involved with drug use, homelessness
and other issues, I discovered that there is definitely the feeling that the
policy did not go far enough; some believe that legalisation and regulation are
the only solutions. Financing, from the state and local governments, has
dwindled, and drug users still feel punished purely for being drug users. Though
people are more accepting, Santa Maria notes that, “although they support our
work, they don’t want to deal with it on their own doorstep”. When I asked João
Goulão about these complaints, he responded in an empathetic but pragmatic way.
It is clear that he cares about how his policy is perceived by those it affects,
but being an activist and being a politician are two separate things; in charge
of a delicate political balancing act, it is a tricky task to please
politicians, the public and drug users all at the same time.

The global trend towards cannabis legalisation is also causing problems. Part of
the basis for the entire Portuguese policy is that there is no such thing as
‘hard’ drugs and ‘soft’ drugs; all of them are treated as equal. However, with
other countries starting to legalise cannabis, this creates a sticky situation
for the Portuguese. It would be very difficult, if not impossible, to justify
the legalisation of cannabis; if all drugs are equally ‘good’ or ‘bad’, then if
you legalise one, you must legalise them all.

**Looking ahead - Is Portugal an example to follow?**

As I stated earlier, it is hard to label the policy in a binary sense of ‘it
works’ or ‘it does not work’. That said, I find it difficult not to see the
Portuguese policy as progress in the right direction. There are clearly some
issues, but these generally take the form of improvements that need to be made,
rather than fundamental problems of the policy itself. As more and more
countries start to think about and implement similar policies, the Portuguese
2001 legislation is still relevant nearly twenty years later. Whether or not it
serves as an example or model for other countries is debatable. Drug policy is
very nuanced, and each individual country has its own idiosyncrasies and culture
that would affect whether decriminalisation would work. To try and imitate the
Portuguese success by replicating them would not work; the policy was reacting
to a specific situation at a specific time. However, using the Portuguese as an
inspiration of alternative policymaking, and thus reviewing our own beliefs
about drug and drug policy could be a way forward. Too often, we follow the
dogma that we have been taught by friends, family, politicians, looking for an
easy, ‘one size fits all’ answer to the very difficult question of drug policy.
The Portuguese have shown us that there is another way, and maybe we should take
note.
