---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "The Wandering Wonder"
author: harshita.jain
cover: Destinations-Map-Of-The-World-Map-Travel-Country.jpg
tags: society
date: 2019-07-12 17:00
link: https://www.maxpixel.net/static/photo/1x/Destinations-Map-Of-The-World-Map-Travel-Country-235941.jpg
---
Have you ever wandered off while sitting down―all in your head, all out of
wonder? Ever imagined multiple lives for yourself? Ever wondered how there are a
gazillion lives that are all affected by the interconnectedness of everything?
Has there been a time when you have wanted to exchange places, or be at multiple
places, living multiple lives at the same time? If you have, my friend, we are
aboard the same boat and I hope your frustration wards off just as soon as I
wish for mine to leave. Or maybe, just maybe, better yet, this wonder is what
keeps us afloat, keeps us from dreading the worst. We know there’s a lot that
exists, we know we may never know about it all, and maybe it’s this wonder that
keeps us excited to be alive. I may be rationalising here and I promise to get
rid of this defence mechanism as soon as I find a better one. But language is
funny in more ways than not. We feel liberated using it, and at the same time,
there is also a strange kind of entrapment. We cannot communicate without words,
and yet are words sufficient to voice everything we feel?

Personally, I did not know that the frustration of being limited to one
experience was a common dilemma, I had no idea there was even a name for it,
albeit none that one can use in their English essay. Onism, and we shall all
thank John Koenig for the same, is a word that tries to explain the frustration
of being stuck in just one body, that inhabits only one place at a time. It is
understood to be like standing in front of the departures screen at an airport,
flickering over with strange place names like other people’s passwords, each
representing one more thing you will never get to see before you die―and all
because, as the arrow on the map helpfully points out, you are here.

One can imagine how much more rich and satisfying it would be to have multiple
bodies, not just one―so one could escape themselves for a while and live on the
other side of the planet. Or take a step back and see themselves from someone
else’s point of view, in full context with the rest of the world, with their
face the right way around, their eyes un-flattened, just as vivid as one appears
to other people. It would be like knowing yourself like others do, judging our
own quirks but with much less self-loathing, just seeing them as unique factions
of our being. However absurd the idea may seem; it would bring so much more
clarity and joy. Of course, this may be coming from a place of bias, with myself
being someone who has felt this for a long time and only just recently found out
about the word that expresses it so well on an unanticipated night. A friend
introduced me to *The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows* and that’s when I met with
the genius work of John Koenig. This man is on a mission to fill the gaps
incurred in the English language.

His dictionary includes words that describe emotions that one may feel but can’t
put into motion through speech or writing, it includes questioning the
limitations that language puts on us. One has to acknowledge that our bodies and
minds are bombarded with so many complex sensations throughout the day that it
would be impossible to assign a name to each. Feelings are a product of any
stimulation one can procure―the lack of it―a phenomenon in itself. Even though
*Merriam* and *Oxford* haven’t made it yet, Koenig with his popular Tumblr Blog
and subsequent YouTube Channel and website is paving the way. *TDOBS* is
intriguing because it presents a word that is obscure or completely invented and
then connects it to a stylised video to further enhance the definition of that
word. As Koenig indicates on his website, “Each original definition aims to fill
a hole in the language—to give a name to emotions we all might experience but
don’t yet have a word for.”

Koenig has said multiple times that the blog began with his desire to write
poems. He made up words to help frame the poems better. He insists that the
inception began at a dark time in his life. In his Ted Talk, Koenig recollects
the time when his own melancholy triggered him to compose the dictionary, and
how people later came up to him to thank him for his work. The graphic
designer/editor/voice performer speaks of how his sombreness gave him a penchant
for words. One should be aware of the fact that he makes sure that all his words
have etymological significance. That they all have sense and reason behind them.
*TDOBS* gained popularity with the wilfulness of Twitter, someone tweeted out 23
of the words and then, boom! The crowd came rushing, in shared understanding of
the un-worded emotions. Words such as 'sonder' have made it to the bigwigs, with
companies using them to name products. A very prominent bar in New York has
named its drinks after the 23 popularised words; artists too have now started
naming their paintings with the help of these words, so as to express themselves
better.

One might wonder why out of every interesting word this man has invented, I
longed to make this word the winter sun―Onism. Onism is a portmanteau of monism
+ onanism. In philosophy, monism is the view that a variety of things can be
explained in terms of a single reality or substance, or a distinct source. Onism
can be seen as a kind of monism, because one’s life is indeed limited to a
single reality, by virtue of being restricted to a single body, but something is
clearly missing. Meanwhile, onanism is another word for masturbation or
self-pleasure, transfixed inside our own menagerie of fantasies like going on a
sightseeing tour of our own apartment—frustrating in its closed-off familiarity.
Again, something is missing. What makes it even more special is that Onism was
born while Koenig was travelling in an airplane, across 6 countries, in the
process of moving places and struggling with the idea of a new life. To me, this
brings in the idea more so than anything else. It makes me think of Remedial
Chaos Theory: there are lots of me in other timelines who - collectively - have
done everything I have not. It is the awareness of everything you are giving up,
to be where you are right now. It is questioning the excuses we have invented to
explain why so much of our life belongs in the background. Koenig very well
expresses this in how he words his video transcripts- “We sketch monsters on the
map because we find their presence comforting. They guard the edges of the
abyss, and force us to look away; so, we can live comfortably in the Known
World, at least for a little while.” An analogy I came across may help you
visualise it better.

By the time we enter primary school, we have heard all about the planets in our
Solar System. As we grow older, we learn that the Solar System is just a speck
in the Milky Way Galaxy, and that there are thousands of galaxies out there,
peppering our universe with their glow and might. The celestial mysteries that
beckon to us are countless, but we resign ourselves to the fact that they are
limited to computer screens and observatories. We accept the fact that the stars
are too far away to take seriously, that Jupiter has a turbulent red spot over
twice the size of our planet, that the moon will always be a distant relative.
So instead, we look around at how far the horizon is and how hauntingly it
encircles us. That scircle is just a fleck of life, dotted on the surface of the
earth.

We may think about the number of adventures we could be having, the divergent
memories we could be creating, the new people we could be meeting—within the
ring that encircles us. We have only one body, although our minds would surely
wish we had ten. The world becomes even more intriguing once we extricate
ourselves from that ring- there are mountains and slopes waiting to be climbed,
fields of snow waiting to be shaped into spheres and thrown, peaks that are
craving to be mounted, oceans with shadowy depths, beautiful creatures, and fish
that we still do not know exist. There are villages waiting to be visited, whose
culture is unlike anything we have ever witnessed. There are waterfalls,
rainforests, and glaciers still unknown to the human mind, foreign sunshine that
is waiting to infuse itself into our bloodstreams, caves that scream adrenaline
and excitement. There are airplanes, trains, cars, bicycles, and our own two
feet. But something stops us, limitations confine us. The lack of time, money,
and flexibility in our schedules. The fact that the seconds keep ticking by,
that so much of our time goes in useless endeavours we will never remember. And
the reality that we cannot be in two places at once. The fact that our two feet
are rooted in the same place, that there are millions of places we could be in
right now—but we are always forced to choose one. That when we are at the
airport, we have only one destination to go to—while the other cities flicker
like candlelight on a windy afternoon. When we drive a car, there are thousands
of alternate routes we could take. And yet, we do not—because we believe that we
are not meant to deviate from our predetermined route. In other words, we are
unknowingly ensnared. Onism is the frustration of knowing how little of the
universe we will be able to appreciate; the impatience of seeing the stars
twinkling at night, as if mocking our inability to escape the ground. But
somehow, it only makes us dream more. Our inability to traverse the Solar System
makes us imagine; it makes us envisage a universe that is probably more
beautiful and romantic than what it really is. 

One may construe Onism as something that resembles sadness or sorrow, or one may
call it the Chi Force and what keeps us alive, but whatever it may be thought of
as- we are all affected by it, however it may come. I’d really encourage people
to go about looking for *The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows* and open their minds
to new words that express age-old emotions. 

Given the chance, I’d definitely like to end with a line from Koenig’s script- 

"But if someone were to ask you on your Deathbed

What it was like to live here on Earth

Perhaps the only honest answer would be,

I don’t know, I passed through it once, but I’ve really been there.”
