---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "The Cl*t Wants What it Wants"
author: stuti.gupta
cover: Jean_Auguste_Dominique_Ingres_-_Roger_Delivering_Angelica.jpg
tags: society
date: 2019-03-21 10:52
link: https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orlando_furioso#/media/File:Jean_Auguste_Dominique_Ingres_-_Roger_Delivering_Angelica.jpg
---
Manically cross-checking to ensure that your search history is finally cleared
of every *flogging* and every *caning* or suddenly having no faith in
technology’s ability to truly remain incognito: People will go to any length to
avoid the embarrassment of enjoying kink. Interestingly, it’s not the idea that
one consumes porn that one feels the need to hide but the kind or *category* of
porn, especially the moment it starts deviating from the missionary position.

The anxiety of being caught watching BDSM is no different from the anxiety one
feels when telling friends about a new crush. “Oh, but he looks better in
person!”, “His meme game isn’t strong but I swear he’s hilarious when you talk
to him.” Crushes are people we aren’t even emotionally invested in (yet), so why
do we care about what our friends think of them? It’s because of what we *want*,
we perceive as an extension of us. And this applies to kinky porn as well. We’re
scared of what it says about us, we are scared of the fact that *these* are our
innermost cravings and desires, that this is who we are. We’re not only scared
of how others see us but also of how we see ourselves, we’re scared of being a
certain person. And this fear magnifies when how we feel is in conflict with how
we think.

Sometimes, the brain just can’t accept what the clitoris wants. One could detest
the word ‘slut’ otherwise, but love being called one during sex. What’s
offensive in daylight is often a turn-on at night. And while there is definitely
a context of consent to any healthy form of kink and acts like *choking* and
*slapping* cannot be seen in isolation, consent is not the whole answer to why
we want something, it’s not the answer to why we crave something. I think that’s
the hauntingly beautiful role sex plays in our lives because it is the place
where we confront the distinction between what we believe and what we feel.

It is the undeniability of the desire, (people will literally have sex even if
there’s a risk of getting stoned to death) that makes sex as scary as it is
wonderful. Sex scandalises the very proprieties and ideas of self we hold so
dear while also feeling good enough to incentivise us to navigate through those
same discomforting ideas and get to the G(ood) spot. Sex is frightening because
it betrays us. In an era of intellectual dissection and analysis of every topic,
we think we have a certain degree of control over who we are, we think our sense
of self arises from all that we know, we think that our thoughts can control
what we do or do not **desire**. We think we can choose to want or not want
something. But that’s exactly how it does not work. Ultimately, it is the
dominance of the subconscious that manifests in yearning and in longing.

It is notable how fantasies often play around concepts of morality that are
borrowed from the traditional cultural fabric. For instance, what underlies the
‘good girl’ fantasy? It entails punishing a girl during sex for liking sex or
craving it, judged by indicators such as having an engorged clitoris or a wet
pussy.

It seems rather counterintuitive to shame the girl for liking sex as a way to
further arouse her, but there’s a reason it works. The ‘good girl’ trope in
role-plays exploits the archaic idea of how a woman is not supposed to want sex,
and the notion of how in order to be a ‘good woman’, a woman must never want sex
for her own physical gratification but only for the purpose of pleasing a man.
The moment (in role-play) the man is able to make her feel like she isn’t the
one seeking sex she feels she is fulfilling her *role* by serving only his
needs. When she is punished for enjoying something she isn’t supposed to, the
appeal lies in the justice of getting what she deserves (the punishment) for
betraying the rule (women not desiring sex).

The spirit behind it is the idea: am I finally being what a woman is supposed to
be?

A lot of forms of kink revolve around power, specifically the distortions in its
proportions. There is a whole spectrum to kink and the spectrum is so wide that
most of us fall somewhere in it. It isn’t just about chains and straps in sex
dungeons, it could be something as simple as liking it when a guy takes your
hair by his fists. Cravings for power distortions are much more relatable for an
average individual than one might realise. And like in every other discussion, a
discussion about sexual kink too will reek of naivete if it doesn’t take into
account the politics of gender. The overwhelming overlap of women with
submission and men with dominance has more to it than just men being ‘on top’.
Seizing sovereignty in a sexual scenario is quite territorial in nature. To
claim and to be claimed both give the same kind of comfort, that we’re someone
else’s. For instance, tying your partner’s hands during sex and being able to
restrain them is attached to the thrill of owning them, even if only in fantasy
or even if only for a while.

There is a romance to that, because it screams the message, “You and only you
can do that with me because I love you and I’m yours, just yours.” After all, we
are all just frazzled souls looking to belong to other humans. While we try to
understand and get to the heart of these fantasies, the important thing to
remember is: *desires don’t cease to exist just because you can’t make sense of
them.* No logic or its absence thereof can ever invalidate something that has
been felt. In fact, I think it’s comforting that there’s at least one part of
life which is ruled by the subconscious and there is peace in the knowledge that
this has already been determined for us and it’s not something that needs to be
built and established. It is an exercise in futility to try and tamper with
these desires. Desires arise from within, what happens on the outside is merely
the manifestation.

Let sexuality be outside the realm of your control. Let your fantasies betray
you.
