---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Jadis the Bells: The Pyres of Notre Dame"
author: morgan.black
cover: Fire_at_Notre-Dame_de_Paris.jpg
tags: culture
date: 2019-04-25 14:05
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/Fire_at_Notre-Dame_de_Paris.jpg/1024px-Fire_at_Notre-Dame_de_Paris.jpg
---

Jadis, the bells. Paris is in flames. Notre de Dame de Paris, my dearest, most
cherished Cathedral, our Lady of Paris, is burning.

Or certainly, it was when I began writing. Now it sits, an exhausted carcass,
divested of that eldest of jewels from the Parisian skyline. Much of the stained
glass is ruined. And the windows have been blinded.

This is particularly painful for all French people. I, like many of them, have a
long, difficult and passionate relationship with Notre Dame, mostly because of
how much I have sung about it. I remember the first time I saw the Cathedral
itself depicted, in the Disney film, *The Hunchback of Notre Dame*. The most
gothic, the darkest piece in the mouse's repertoire, it marked me as a child.
The first time I heard those voices, coupled with those spires, stabbing into
that sky, I was terrified, I was exhilarated, I was amazed at the power of the
artistic and dark marvel. It stayed with me forever.

The passion people can have for something so immortal as a building can truly
show how they can bring out the personhood within our creations, the moral in
the static. Anthropology has much to say about such things, particularly in the
works of Michel Foucault, especially on how architecture affects peoples'
feelings; how their surroundings affect their moods; how buildings can be so
evocative, purely because of this integral intransitive nature of the human
spirit, because of this very ghost within the shell. And what ghosts do haunt
our cities now.

Victor Hugo knew this, in fact he published that famous hunchback's tale in an
effort to generate public interest in the Cathedral, which was at the time
Paris's local, dilapidated and forgotten ruin. His book, in time, helped garner
enough interest to pay for the restorations we saw crumble and part into dust
and smoke in the wind. And so that spirit passes. And so passes the old Europe,
into oblivion.

The first time I ever sang a solo in our rural town's music conservatoire young
choir, at say 12 or 13, I knew what I would sing about. I still remember my name
being called, as I stepped out from behind the curtain to expectant applause,
and the bells shook, and the voices did swell, until my queue, on a little
accordion...

"Morning in Paris, the city awakes to the Bells of Notre Dame. The fisherman
fishes, the bakerman bakes, to the Bells of Notre Dame. From the big bells as
LOUD as the Thunder, to the little bells as -soft- as a psalm, and SOME say the
SOUL of the city's the TOLL of the bells... The Bells of Notre Dame. Kyrie
eleison...".

And it was never the same for me again. I still remember sitting in the cellar
of our old 15th century house, in France, intermittently watching the musical
Notre Dame de Paris, waiting for my calls to help with the dinners we would host
at the Manor. I sat in awe as Bruneau Pelletier sang away about “a time of
Cathedrals”, becoming one of my vocal heroes, the song becoming one of my go-to
standards. That famous song of the successful musical show touches on the advent
of the Cathedral as a symbol of man’s growing ambition in Europe, heralded by
the Gothic.

In the passage from Romanesque to Gothic architecture, in making the buildings
bigger, European architecture had looked to nature to make the inside of
churches resemble the outside world and was inspired by the natural landscape
for decoration and adaptation of space. The very term ‘gothic’ itself was used
derogatively by writers like Molière to criticise a barbarous, pagan style
called monstrous by association with a less ‘civilised’ age.

By very virtue of worshipping a ‘pagus’, a local spirit of nature, the earlier
pagans venerated nature, and medieval Christian churches began to take on
aspects emulative of the ‘nemetons’, sacred groves of the heathens from Europe
of yore. Greeks and Romans themselves had their ‘tenemos’, areas of vegetation
or clearings separated from public use, for a religious purpose (associated with
the female Oracle at Delphi; perhaps related to the Greek *delphus*, ‘womb’).
The Norse Poetic *Edda* features the open-air ‘hörgr’ (harrow, etymologically
related to ‘heathen’). D. Wilson notes that for the Anglo-Saxons, the hörgr is
specifically a “special type of religious site, that occupied a prominent
position on high land and was a communal place of worship for a specific group
of people”.

Soon, almost as if inspired by a divine, pagan purpose sleeping within them, as
if it had been dictated to them by an ancestral wisdom, the medieval European
builders of gothic churches beheld the truly sacred, the natural world, and made
of it a cold, stone creation. They took the magical outside, brought it inside,
and made of it the prerogative of their one god and the possession of the mortal
man. All of this, in simple architecture, in ancient stone.

Even the veneration of fertility in the form of resplendent, beautiful goddesses
was retained somehow by the Europeans of old Paris, for though referring to the
Virgin Mary, they made of this now presently wounded cathedral, ‘Our Lady’, of
the city.  

The first time I saw the place in person was in 2017 on a much belated visit to
the capital, I was shy and nervous about the city, like an estranged friend,
like a lost lover, but when I arrived with a companion acting as guide at the
station of the Isle de la Cité, then I knew. Then I felt it. The soul of Paris.
It was about time. It was about the enduring, deepest European aspect. And then
we went upstairs, and to the street. And I heard it. I heard them. The bells of
Notre Dame.

When I finally did go inside, it was a deeply spiritual experience, but not for
Christian reasons. For only then did I feel and know Paris. The high ceilings
and high halls, evoking Europe’s ancient sacred groves of tall trees, oak, pine
and poplar. The Cathedral's small park by the Seine, watching the people of the
city go by, young people, young students, people from intelligent cities.

People love their cities, and they love the buildings which they and their kin
have woken up to and walked past for centuries. Such a paysage of human
construction acts to support a sort of consistency of a nation’s spirit. These
buildings are a skeleton, they are the frameworks which contain and maintain the
very culture of the people.

And so everywhere, on our social media platforms, on our video-streaming
services, all that can be heard is that “Europe is dying!”. It is not the first
time a great fire having devastated a great edifice of cultural import has
prompted reactions of national significance. Most significantly, comparisons can
be drawn to the 1933 Reichstag Fire, when the burning of the historic German
Parliament building in Berlin allowed Adolf Hitler to put the country into a
state of national alert. This was the first and most conclusive step towards
seizing power on a national scale for Hitler, and it sealed Germany’s future
forever.   

Conspiracies have abounded for decades and ever will as to the cause of such
fires. But the consequences of such fires are inarguable: grim, dejected locals,
suddenly feeling a great need to protect what is theirs for pride and for
sovereignty.

And so, poor Notre Dame. If her bells do not sound, Paris is made mute. If her
glass does not shine, Paris is blinded. But we must not forget that as long as
her children live, Our Lady of Paris survives. And so we must look to future
truth, and future Europeans. If their spirit built her, their spirit can do and
ought to do so much more than this.

Jadis, les cloches. Adieux Notre Dame. Adieux Paris. I owe you the letters after
my name. And I hear you forever in my heart. Jadis, the bells.

And this comes now, when we see ourselves go mad, when a black hole is seen for
the first time, and we stare into it; the abyss stares back, and smiles.

I saw fire, and as it presides over us now, the black hole sun dawns. A vile
rictus upon us. How destiny does smile, sickeningly. How the fates, as the
vates, do seem to have a sense of humour. Clown World begins. A Circle of fire
forms.
