---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "'Missing' Firms in GDP Calculation"
author: gurleen.kaur
cover: question-mark.jpg
tags: economics
date: 2019-06-13 17:34
link: https://images.app.goo.gl/KXQ1jwx5BMd2oJaE9
---
The controversies regarding India's GDP numbers, with 2011-2012 as the base
year, seem to be not coming to an end. The Indian National Sampling Survey
Office's (NSSO) study, ending June 2017, revealed that 38% of the companies
which are a part of the MCA21 database (the Modi government's e-governance
initiative) were missing. The study implied that the inclusion of data from such
companies would grossly overestimate GDP figures.  

**The Background**

In 2015, the Central Statistical Office (CSO) of India issued a new GDP series,
wherein the routine 2004-05 base year was replaced with 2011-12. According to Dr
R. Nagaraj, such a revision usually leads to a slight expansion of the absolute
GDP in the base year, keeping the growth rate constant. But this time, the
absolute GDP was reduced slightly in the base year and the growth rate had an
unprecedented rise.

There were significant changes in the methodology this time. The CSO had shifted
to the latest global template, the System of National Accounts 2008, for
calculations. Moreover, the income accruing to the Private Corporate Sector
(PCS) was directly estimated using the Ministry of Corporate Affairs’ (MCA)
statutory filing of financial returns, i.e. the aforementioned MCA-21. The PCS
accounts for over one-third of the GDP, and has affected estimates of many
industries. The CSO claims that GDP calculation through MCA-21, which is a
larger database than the Annual Survey of Industries for Manufacturing used
previously, better captures the economy’s value addition, especially of smaller
enterprises and services activities. The critics, however, fear that this has
led to a gross overestimation of GDP.  

**The NSSO Survey**

A recent report of the NSSO titled *Technical Report on Service Sector
Enterprises in India* found nearly 38% of the companies surveyed using MCA21
database to be unusable for data collection purposes. Of this, 21% were “out of
coverage” firms, 12% were designated untraceable and 4.5% were closed. Many of
these companies according to Dr R. Nagaraj, are shell/fake/spurious entities
that remain legally registered (but merely on paper) but do not produce goods
and services. The only purpose is to help the owner hide the profits and, thus,
reduce the taxable income.

**Is GDP Overestimated?**

Mr Pronab Sen, former Chief Statistician, disagrees with the fact that GDP is
overestimated due to the data from the ‘missing’ firms. He explains that for the
purpose of measurement of GDP, it is more important for the statisticians that
the shell companies are submitting their balance sheets regularly to the MCA21.
These firms are involved in some form of economic activity, and not measuring
their output would mean severe underestimation of the GDP. The value creation is
happening by some other company, but the transactions are being routed through
these shell companies. Ignoring them would mean a part of the business of the
registered company is being ignored, which is wrong. Hence, the GDP will only be
correctly estimated if we include the data from the shell companies. However,
the taxable income accruing to the private sector and thus the private savings
will surely be underestimated.

Second, growth rates are measured over a period of time and are influenced by
the regularity with which the companies file the returns. Thus, the fact that a
large number of companies are not being measured affects the level of the
economy, but not the growth profile.  

Moreover, the MCA21 database is a compilation of the audited financial returns
filed by the companies. The returns are reconciled with the corporate tax
collected by the Income Tax Department. Mr Sen explains that the audit data from
MCA21 would always be better than unaudited data, the one collected from the
field. The MCA data captures value creation by an entity which is a registered
corporate. The value may be coming from the company itself or simply a book
entry from some other company. This doesn’t matter as far as gross value
addition (GVA) is concerned.  

**MCA21: Foolproof?**

The use of MCA21 database, however, does have its disadvantages. The presence of
spurious firms creates low-level problems related to growth rates and gross
value addition (GVA) by different sectors. For instance, a manufacturing company
can create a shell company as a trading firm. The creation of a fake company of
such kind will lead to some of the GVA by the manufacturing sector being counted
as the GVA by the services sector.  

To consider the argument that all active companies under the MCA have filed
statutory returns at least once during the last three years to be true will be a
mistake. If it were true, there would at least be one year for which there would
existent data for seven to eight hundred thousand companies, which has never
been the case. For most years data is available for around three hundred
thousand active companies. The estimates of gross value added for these three
hundred thousand companies is inflated to obtain the GVA of the universe of 10
hundred thousand companies.  

There can be no denying the fact that MCA21 contains information from shell
companies. The data from such fictitious units cannot be ignored to prevent
underestimation. The only way to make the process of GDP calculation efficient
and transparent would be to weed out these shell companies. The Ministry of
Corporate Affairs (MCA) has started the process of geo-tagging the registered
offices in the returns filed with the Registrar of Companies (RoC). Geo-tagging
is the process of attaching geographical meta-data (exact latitudinal and
longitudinal information) with an online return filing system, alerting the
government if too many companies are registered on the same premises. The
process of geo-tagging is still underway and it would be too early to comment on
its effectiveness.

The debate on the inclusion of figures from shell companies for the calculation
of GDP and the veracity of the GDP numbers is raging. There is a need for
statisticians, economists and policymakers to sit together and find solutions to
these technical issues related to GDP calculation. Additional steps need to be
taken by the Income Tax Department and the Enforcement Directorate (India's
white collar crime watchdog) to clamp down on the operations of such spurious
companies. The Justice Shah Commission, constituted in 2015, highlighted the
role of such companies in money laundering, which is a punishable offence under
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. A holistic government approach is
necessary to fight the menace of shell companies.
