---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "The Bright Side of Sharing Our Data"
author: avinash.naidu
cover: sharing-data-repository.png
pic1: data-sharing-fb-avi.png
tags: policy
date: 2019-10-08
link: "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/To_deposit_or_not_to_deposit%2C_that_is_the_question_-_journal.pbio.1001779.g001.png/1001px-To_deposit_or_not_to_deposit%2C_that_is_the_question_-_journal.pbio.1001779.g001.png"
---
In recent times, there has been a wave of anger towards companies which use
individual data without his or her knowledge. Campaigns like \#OwnYourData,
\#MEGA and most recently, the movie documentary *The Great Hack* have brought
the issue to the limelight.

In this article, I won’t argue that there is no malicious use of personal data,
I would like to show that though there are some cases where data is used for
*'nefarious'* -  I quote nefarious because it is subjective to each individual -
purposes on a whole, the tool known as *data analytics* has brought far more
benefits than harm to society. Fake news and data analytics are separate tools
which though used simultaneously need to be separated. Whilst data analytics is
instrumental in the distribution of fake news, it is not the cause of it.
Gossiping, fear mongering and rumours have been used long before data analytics
even existed. Though I must add that fake news is completely illegal and should
never be condoned. Now that I have set the stage, let's dive right into this
hidden world of data analytics.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%"/> An example of the ads section on Facebook.</div>

Facebook- A name that triggers a whole array of feelings for everyone. A tool
for communicating, connecting and gathering for like-minded people or long-lost
friends, or  a tool to gather our personal data, process it and sell it to the
highest bidder. Not many of us know that we can ourselves see if Facebook is
being *‘mischievous’* with us. Open the ads section under settings to see where
your data has been used. So let’s say Spotify received your data from Facebook,
based on that, they would be able to provide you with music that will most
likely fit your taste. It seems trivial but in this day and age where content is
being created at an exponentially increasing rate, it would be impossible to go
through everything to find something we like. To put perspective on that,
[YouTube is estimated to upload 500 hours of content every minute. That
essentially means that a lifetime of content is uploaded every 2
days.](https://www.businessofapps.com/data/youtube-statistics/#4) It may be
online shopping, holiday booking, travel planning and they all have one goal… to
make our lives easier so we continue using their platforms. In the case of
Facebook, we have a friend that ensures that we get the best options to choose
from.

Arguably, Spotify, YouTube and Facebook are luxury goods, however this is also
prevalent in healthcare. Let’s dive into a hospital to see how data is changing
the way we work. Most hospitals, nowadays, have some sort of digital
ticketing/queuing system which still requires you to wait for hours for your
treatment. With the increased amount of data and software as a Service Business
Intelligence (SaaS BI) tool, hospitals will be able to predict the busiest parts
of the day and staff accordingly to deal with these peaks. This will allow
hospitals to handle more patients more effectively and hence save more lives in
the long run. After getting into your appointment, doctors would be able to have
a full view of your entire medical history, if it was shared. This will, in
turn, allow them to better understand your history which saves time and provides
a more accurate diagnosis. These are two very simple examples which only can
work effectively when medical data is shared.

A third and less obvious example; *what if the medical data was given to
insurance companies?* The fear is that with access to medical data, we will be
charged additionally for all the problems they will find out about. But I argue
differently. With more data available using analytical tools, insurance
companies would be able to better personalize insurance offers which could
actually lead to cheaper premiums due to the removal of unnecessary coverage. On
top of that, insurance companies will be able to better reward people for taking
steps to maintain good health. Lastly, with access to medical data, insurers
will be able to better identify insurance fraud leading to more applicants being
able to claim insurance when required. There is always a risk that some
companies will implement some unfair practices leading to increased premiums.
However, with the growing digital economy and a multitude of options, these
companies are likely to be outcompeted in the free market, making them
unsustainable in the long run. Whilst this is something that will arise in the
future, let’s look at it in a very contemporary context - data analytics in
Political Campaigns.

Before diving into the data analytics of campaigning, I want to highlight that a
campaign is defined as ‘a planned group of especially political, business, or
military activities that are intended to achieve a particular aim*.’ * In the
case of political campaigns, the focus is to convince those who are on the fence
to support your party. Long before the infamy of Cambridge Analytica,
campaigners have been collecting polling data to decide how to target their
campaigns. So why are we suddenly so afraid? Well, mostly it is thanks to our
favourite six-inch toy that we never stop playing with. Due to advancements in
smartphone technology, we are becoming far more connected to the internet, which
in turn leads to more data collected on us. This was the cost of a *‘free’*
internet. The free internet came with the major benefit of allowing everyone a
chance of getting access. That meant that companies needed a different way to
make money online, hence the rise of data collection. Initially, starting out as
a harmless tool to provide advertisers with the attention of relevant
potential-customers. It has now evolved into a behemoth that not only provides
the things we may like but also tries to shift our preferences ever so slightly.
Doesn’t seem so bad, but these subtle nudges to shift our opinions slowly push
us further and further down the extreme path we are on - which is proven by the
increased polarization (shown in multiple studies
[[1]](https://web.stanford.edu/~gentzkow/research/PolarizationIn2016.pdf)
[[2]](https://www.apsanet.org/portals/54/Files/Task%20Force%20Reports/Chapter2Mansbridge.pdf)
[[3]](https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2019-03/Polarisation_and_the_news_media_in_Europe.pdf)
[[4]](https://www.pnas.org/content/115/37/9216)) around the world.

<blockquote>
“Donald Trump’s 2016 digital campaign director claimed to have run 5.9 million
visual ads on Facebook, in contrast to Hillary Clinton’s 66,000”- The Great
Hack.
</blockquote>

This statement made at the end of *The Great Hack* further highlights
that this negative opinion on data analytics is also due to some tactics of fear
mongering and misrepresentation of information*.* Without any context, it seems
like Donald Trump paid to win an election. Then you consider the fact that in
total Hillary Clinton spent [1.4 Billion compared to Trump’s 957.6
Million](https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/politics/2016-election/campaign-finance/?noredirect=on)
on their respective campaigns. The main reason Trump spent more on online ads
was that his fundraising had lagged behind Hillary Clinton, so he had missed out
on the opportunity to spend on TV ads.

There are so many examples of data being used to make our lives better, but at
the end of the day, data analytics is just a tool. In the hands of the right
person, it could bring unprecedented benefits to society. If we go down the
extreme path of fearing the tool, we have lots to lose. That being said, I still
highly recommend everyone to find out what is happening with your data.
Knowledge is power, and we can learn a lot about ourselves from the way our data
is being used.
