---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "The Lived Experience Through The Lens of Pop Culture"
author: pranav.manie
cover: pending.png
tags: millennial culture
date: 2019-07-26 05:40
link: thepangean.com
---
Pop culture was never meant to be therapeutic for the conscience. It was merely
an escape from reality, a make-believe world where you could imagine yourself as
Clint Eastwood on a horse, or as Sylvester Stallone being one hell of a southpaw
boxer. Or, it could have been you taking acid during a Jimi Hendrix concert, or
raging with the grunge bands of the 90's. It was only in the 2000's, the
millennial age, when mainstream pop culture became a place for the reclamation
of maligned narratives. Finally, a space on the global stage for those with
little social capital. Be it non-cisgender people, African-Americans, Latinos or
people with clinical depression; the millennial age did more than take note of
these problems, it made sure that they were heard.

This is not to strip the periods before that of credit for their art. Movies
like *Forrest Gump*, *Platoon*, *Apocalypse Now* and *The Deer Hunter* surely
gave an insight into the prevailing anti-war sentiment in the USA and the
protests by soldiers’ families. These movies could, however, very well be termed
‘Oscar bait’, and they got swept away in the same instead of provoking perhaps
finer, more nuanced details of, say, military life.

 

Take a movie like *Driving Miss Daisy*, for example. It won the Best Picture
Oscar in 1980, but its premise might make one skeptical about the award. Apart
from the hailing of a  ‘white saviour’, the film also promoted stereotypes about
Afro-Americans; illiterate, not self dependent, helpless people who don’t know
what to do in the face of problems. They’re undermined in their own stories.

The difference between that time and today, however, is that our generation
won’t shy away from criticising such films. The films of yore too are
scrutinised under the modern lens of how an ideal world must be; a
post-postmodern critique, if you will. That's how the image of *James Bond* has
evolved. There is no denying that people did not take to a one-dimensional
womanizer spy with cheeky sensibilities and a way to escape every situation
effortlessly. They wanted someone more vulnerable and mortal, and possibly not a
man, which is evident in the recent wave of Bond movies.

Moreover, take a look at the movies and shows of today. *Get Out* was a pivotal
movie that took shots at liberals for ‘acting black’, thinking that that would
solve racism. A less-talked-about but incredibly influential show was the Donald
Glover show *Atlanta*, that was hailed by many Atlanta natives as a true
portrayal of life and culture in the city. The show humanised Afro-Americans.
This trend extends to a lot of shows, like *Orange Is The New Black*, that
eventually went beyond the lead character and ended up becoming one of the most
inclusive shows in recent times.

Mainstream music has also changed drastically over the past two decades. Hip-hop
- a genre often criticised for the use of homophobic slurs as a metric for
masculinity - has now included artists like Tyler, The Creator, and more
recently, Lil Nas X who thought it was safe enough to reveal their sexualities
and talk about their experiences through their music. Notably, Tyler was accused
of using one such slur. Musicians such as St Vincent and Troye Sivan have been
much more open about the same throughout their discography.

Conscious hip-hop has also gained popularity, with the advent of artists like
Kendrick Lamar and Kanye West, who wrap messages and lived experiences in ear
candy. Even pop stars like Beyonce and Lady Gaga have been using their global
influence to further discussions that several years ago would have been
considered too taboo to even be talked about.

But what does this increasing demand for inclusivity tell us? We, the
millennials, want our screens to show us something that evokes not merely
sympathy but also empathy. We want to see lived experiences. We do not want
tokenistic gestures of inclusivity, but full-blooded accounts of stories about
people that are not necessarily us. The idea that racism is over simply because
a privileged character learns about the struggles of the ostracised minority,
has been running for all of Hollywood’s existence; Hollywood’s systemic Oscar
bait and guaranteed cash churning mechanism. Authentic stories, like real life,
are possibly boring to them. They also forget the one rule of moviemaking: do
not underestimate the audience. The same goes for music: concept albums exist to
tell a story that’s beyond our imagination. Millennials, especially those who
are part of the minority have become fed up of the fact that they can not see
any entertainment that resembles them. They expect human depictions of what it
means to belong to their race, religion, caste or gender.

One might even argue that the severance of human connection has left us seeking
something *real* in our cinema. The millennial is looking for relatability and
human fallibility more than he is looking for fantasy. The craving to feel is
seen in how much readership emo Tumblr experiences achieve or in how much shows
like BoJack Horseman shine. BoJack Horseman is highly acclaimed primarily
because it really touches a nerve, in millennials, in the domain of mental
health. It lets its viewers comprehend the consequences of such actions that
already might have happened to them. Besides, the idea then also becomes about
combining reality and fantasy, brutality and comedy, to make more high-end
surreal art.

There is definitely the tough question that all of this poses: do we really need
more and more art to get us to empathise with something? Isn’t once enough? To
be honest, we are all guilty of it, including this writer here. It becomes a
global statement, that our inaction, or our perception is part of the problem,
if not the actual problem. But it has been done before, with resounding success.
During the \#BlackLivesMatter movement in 2015, Kendrick Lamar released his hit
song *Alright*. The refrain “We gon’ be alright” became the cry of the rally for
some time and unified the protestors. We do not need conscious art to feel good
about ourselves because we have seen/heard it; we need it to make us better
people, if at all we really need it.

The good news is that inclusion and adequate representation in media has taken a
much higher priority today as compared to earlier times. A UCLA study on
diversity in Hollywood states that people of colour have quadrupled their share
of broadcast television from 5.1% in 2011-12 to 21.5% in 2017-18.

Millennials are better educated as compared to previous generations, with 39% of
people having a bachelor’s degree or higher; to compare, at the same age, the
same statistic was 29% for Gen X, around 25% for baby boomers, and 15% for the
Silent Generation. Higher education is becoming accessible to people of various
cultures. The Deloitte Global Millennial Survey talks about how millennials only
like firms that abide by their values, and any non-adherence to consumer values
on their part will make them or break them. People are more receptive to
personal and social problems, and while there are a myriad of surveys pointing
to how millennials are becoming less empathetic, one can not deny that it is the
millennials who are shaping narratives about intersectionality, privilege, class
and race amongst other things. Call it political correctness or call it
sensitivity, it has arguably bettered the debate. It is this nuance that is
slowly but surely influencing content around us.

 

Quintessential to this is the scenario of Indian stand-up comedy. After the
calling out of the prevalence of sexual harassment in what was perceived as a
circle that was *woke just for show*, female comedians have been earning what’s
due to them. Their jokes are a lot more oriented towards the female experience,
quite naturally, whilst their other observations are arguably spot on. In
another example, TVF’s *Kota Factory* created ripples across the student
community in India for its bleak but true depiction of the city. Engineering
students possibly shed tears at the time the show was released because they saw
their life reflected in it. Millennials are both creating and consuming bold
content.

Studios understand the importance of discourse for long-term retention of the
millennial as a consumer. This is evident in the shifts in strategy by platforms
such as Netflix towards creating content that is politically or socially
charged. These shifts in strategy betray how they see their consumers; as a
generation that wants to confront socio-politico realities head on. As a
generation that is so desperate to connect to the characters on screen, to view
life through the lens of cinema as a way of trying to make sense of our own
troubles and our trauma. We seek a lot fewer heroes and a lot more flawed humans
in our cinema.
