---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "51.9% to 48.1%- UK’s Super-close Vote to Leave: Legitimate or Not?"
author: sailesh.buchasia unnati.jain
cover:
tags: policy
date: 2019-08-31 01:00
link: thepangean.com
---
It was preposterous to observe the twist of events when back in the 2009 data
speech, the former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, David Cameron,
described internet of things to be an ‘amazing pollinator’ that ‘turns lovely
fights into mass campaigns; transforms moans into movements; excites the
attention of hundreds, thousands, millions of people and stirs them into
action.’ This same power became a major concern for him when millions of people
were triggered, provoked and mobilized through this very medium to vote for
Brexit.  

*This is a company that has worked with hacked material, this is a company that
will send out videos of people being murdered to intimidate voters, this is a
company that goes out and tries to illicitly acquire live internet browsing data
of everyone in an entire country.*

An ex-Cambridge Analytica employee, whistle-blower Christopher Wylie, made this
statement which only goes on to portray the tip of the iceberg which revolved
around the Brexit referendum and Cambridge Analytica’s utter ignorance for the
law. Cambridge Analytica Ltd. (CA) was a data analysis and mining entity that
had played an extremely controversial part in the *Leave European Union*
campaign. They assisted the official *Vote Leave* campaign and skillfully found
a way to circumvent the campaign funding laws. Leaked documents disclosed that
the *Vote Leave* campaign, the official pro-Brexit group, headed by Michael Gove
and Boris Johnson, paid a hefty 625,000 pounds to a Canadian data organisation
named Aggregate IQ (AIQ). In contrast to the two companies’ statements of
denying a coordination during the referendum, Wylie testified that CA and AIQ
shared data with one another on a persistent basis. "You can't have targeting
software that doesn't access the database. Cambridge Analytica would have a
database and AIQ would access that database, otherwise the software wouldn't
work," Wylie said. 

Christopher Wylie, the whistle-blower who worked alongside Cambridge University
researcher Aleksandr Kogan to reap the data for Cambridge Analytica, told the
Observer that they had exploited Facebook to acquire millions of people’s
profiles. The unified intention of the company was to form a model which could
help them manipulate the targeted audience. The New York Times and UK-based
Observer reported that more than 50 million Facebook users had their data
harvested by Cambridge Analytica which has been called as the social media
platform's largest data breach till date. It was disclosed that they used the
data to target users with customised political advertisements to further Trump's
presidential bid and the pro-Brexit drive.

British journalist Carole Cadwalladr, in her Ted talk, highlights the specific
case of Ebbw Vale. Ebbw Vale, a small town in South Wales, had one of the cities
with the highest percentage of *leave* votes (62%-38%) despite the fact that it
had several regeneration projects funded by the EU. However, much to the
surprise, the residents were of the view that the European Union had done
nothing for them. “Take back control”- one of the most widely used slogans in
the campaign backed this perspective, and this fire was further fuelled by the
supposed problem of refugees and immigrants contrary to which statistics showed
that the immigration rates in Ebbw were one of the lowest. All of these facts
didn’t add up together and did not provide the whole picture. Eventually,
everything that could be found out was insufficient, because everything took
place in ‘black boxes’- on Facebook, Google, YouTube. People testified that they
saw ads on Facebook like – “76m population of Turkey to join the EU”, and other
such statements, which lacked credibility. Such advertisements, feed, and posts
were shown to a specifically targeted tiny silver of persuadable people to tilt
their votes towards *Leave*. Facebook, along with Cambridge Analytica was
responsible for leaking data from people’s profiles to the groups like Vote
Leave who in turn, illegally targeted them. The campaign had sabotaged the
opposition with more vociferous and aggressive supporters on all the social
media handles leading to the uprising of *leave* supporters at the grassroot
level. They outnumbered and dominated platforms like Twitter, Instagram and
Facebook influencing and manipulating ambivalent voters who were made mere
puppets in their hands. 

On platforms like Twitter it was seen that people, not necessarily knowledgeable
about politics, were able to make huge decisions for the future of a country
based on hashtags and memes they have seen online. During the time leading up to
the referendum in 2016, the number of people supporting the *Leave* campaign
outnumbered the *Remain* campaign on Twitter by 7 to 1 and the most used
hashtags were \#Brexit, \#Beleave and \#VoteLeave.  When it comes to this
serious political issue, this could be potentially damaging as users are likely
to be influenced by whichever message appears most often or most prominent
rather than necessarily searching for the true facts.

Social media has changed the face of political campaigning and will inevitably
continue doing so playing an indispensable role in the future elections to come
all across the globe. It has been a commonplace to hypothesize that social media
is a vital medium for distorted facts which restricts citizens to mere echo
cubicles. The upside is that we get to participate in it like never before, we
comment, we share, we tweet but unfortunately, our favourite social media
networks have also slaughtered the essence of fair elections by distorting and
shaping the outcomes according to their whims and fancies. It has evolved as a
mighty force to aid the reach of political narratives. This election has taught
us that the boosting technology is open to all and the messy, multi-directional,
bottom up practices of diffusing and absorbing information will play an
ever-greater role in processes of public opinion formation-- for better or for
worse. 

Those people who still regard ‘Brexit’ as a conundrum for political thinkers and
politicians, it is time to comprehend that the referendum and the current
negotiations will persistently act as an element of impact on virtually every
aspect of society. Don’t believe us? Well, social media is often looked to as a
portrayal of world dynamics, none more so than with Britain’s expected departure
from the European Union.
