---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "From Corbyn to Podemos, Don't Forgive Maduro’s Cheerleaders"
author: reuben.pritchard
cover: assets/images/venezuala_protests.jpg
tags: policy
date: 2019-03-07 04:30
link: https://www.flickr.com/photos/64461923@N00/12716453043
---
Venezuela is on fire. Two decades of mismanagement by a corrupt regime has left
its people starving, fleeing, and cowering from government death squads. Venezuela,
the world’s most oil-rich state is in ruins. The extent of the spoil has been so
thorough that it now imports more oil from the United States than it produces.
Much of this is because of the severe deficiency of refinement infrastructure.
In addition, hyperinflation has been a major battle for the administration. For
a nation which does not print its own currency, this surely is a cruel fate.
Cash money has become a rare sight. Probably due to the fact that the government
can barely afford to buy new currency. Last Christmas, a plane from Basingstoke
(a quaint Hampshire town) touched down in Caracas, filled with newly printed
Bolivars. The lowest valued note onboard was already worth less than a single US
cent.

But the problems for the Venezuelans weren’t just limited to financial setbacks.
It includes corruption, violence, and extreme disparity within the economic
classes―which fueled tensions. In 2016, the incumbent President, Nicolas Maduro
created a new wing of the police, the Special Action Force or FAES. Various
human rights groups have accused them of acting as Death Squads. They have
allegedly entered low-income neighbourhoods to harass and, sometimes, execute
the rivals and competitors of the regime. Since the beginning of the year,
forty-three protestors have been confirmed to have died in clashes with the
police.

Nicolas Maduro and his predecessor, Hugo Chavez have taken actions that have had
a tragic effect on the lives of ordinary Venezuelans. Over 3.4 million people
now live as refugees, desperately trying to flee poverty. The wealthiest nation
of South America, just a few decades ago, is now a page out of a book and
nothing more. But what makes the Maduro regime so unique is the support it gets
from many useful idiots across the developed world. While dictators like Robert
Mugabe in Zimbabwe and Bashar Al-Assad in Syria have arguably committed far more
heinous crimes against their own people, neither can boast such a committed fan
base in wealthy nations.

Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the UK Labour Party and Her Majesty's Most Loyal
Opposition is an avid fan of the Chavez-Maduro regime. He has personally called
Maduro to congratulate him on an election victory in 2016. This is the very
election which was decried as unfair by Human Rights Watch. The Labour Party is
the second largest party in the United Kingdom’s House of Commons and the
largest political movement in Europe by the membership. Its prominent members
include Owen Jones who wrote in 2012, “Chavez’s critics in the West are entitled
to passionately disagree with him. But it’s time they stopped pretending he is a
dictator”. That was 4 years after Chavez expelled Human Rights Watch from the
country. In 2014, Corbyn’s top lieutenant John Mcdonnell said, “Here you had the
contrast between capitalism in crisis, and socialism in action.”

Now, this article isn’t about the asinine debate on whether the Venezuelan
economy can truly be considered socialist or not. I personally doubt a regime as
corrupt as Chavez’s could have ever carried out the necessary reforms to
institute a socialist economy. But we should remember the man who may soon be
the UK Chancellor of The Exchequer (Finance Minister), lauded Venezuela a
‘socialist’ regime, saying it was a nation worth emulating.

The Greek Prime Minister, Alexis Tsipras, was the only European head of
government who had attended Hugo Chavez’s funeral, way back in 2012. There he
praised Venezuela as an anti-capitalist model country, and has since remained
friendly with the Venezuelan regime. This has continued over the current crisis.
It should be noted that Tsipras hasn’t instituted the type of authoritarian
reforms of the Chavez and Maduro regimes for his own country. But his fondness
for their government begs the question: what would he have done if Syriza had
achieved a majority in the Greek Parliament or if he didn’t have the European
Union overseeing his administration ready to sanction it for anti-democratic
policies. Jean-Luc Melancon, the leader of the French Left, also in the past,
praised the Chavez regime. In 2013, he described it as a “source of
inspiration”. However, since then, he has changed his mind claiming that he
doesn't “support dictatorship”, and that he has “never supported dictatorship
anywhere in the world”.

Then there is Podemos, the Spanish Left-wing party. Since, its foundation, it
has had a special relationship with the Bolivarian regime in Venezuela. Several
of its founders, including its leader Pablo Iglesia, have been economic advisors
to the Venezuelan government. Iglesia once called Venezuela "one of the most
consolidated democracies in the world". According to a think tank, which is
close to the party, Podemos has received millions in funding from the regime, as
published in the Spanish newspaper ABC. Nevertheless, Iglesia has now u-turned
on his support for the dictatorship. Earlier this year, he was caught on record
saying, “I don't agree with some of the things I said in the past, and I believe
that the political and economic situation in Venezuela is disastrous. To rectify
in politics is a good thing".

In a few months, voters all across Europe will have the chance to vote, in free
and fair elections, for who they want as their representatives in the European
Parliament. Voting is a hard-fought privilege held by far less than half of the
world's population. It was once the right that the people of Venezuela had. If
the European Left’s radical leaders, who supported Chavez and Maduro, win the
elections they are, of course, unlikely to institute the authoritarian policies
as seen in Venezuela. This is because Europe's civic institutions are strong and
it’s people remember what a dictator looks like. Having said that though, we
must remember that the support of the radical Left for the Venezuelan regime is
a cause for grave concern to the lovers of democracy. It resonates the hard
truth, as to what type of policies all these leaders would like to introduce, if
only they had the power they believe they deserve.
