---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Rise of the Screen Thriller"
author: pranav.manie
cover: social-media.jpeg
tags: millennial culture
date: 2019-07-26 04:10
link: https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn%3AANd9GcRRl7k4v61uxSOj0EiLUUJCVkaNmlh6h5fiOlakUFrEubt19ehn
---
Internet culture has pervaded scriptwriting in various ways. It has provided
useful ways of releasing information to the audience. Meme culture, ways of
writing texts, or communication through a certain type of media reveals a
subtext previously unknown, but in every conversation that follows, you consider
these subtexts to figure out how the situation will unfold.

Take the BBC masterpiece, *Sherlock*, for example. Sherlock is quite often in
contact with his arch-nemesis Jim Moriarty, and we know that through the message
bubbles which pop up on the screen for us to see whilst we simultaneously
observe Sherlock’s expressions. *Black Mirror* portrays the internet the best -
take an episode like *Nosedive*; a brutal, horrifying account of what happens if
we introduce a social credit rating for humans or *Shut Up And Dance*; an
episode that’ll instantly make you cover your webcam with some tape.

These, however, are still conventional ways of storytelling. Even though the
aforementioned devices make use of internet culture, they still fall short of
being able to harness the full power of what someone experiences when online.
The need to harness and depict that is what led to the *computer screen
thriller* being born - a stylish new method of movie-making. Most or all of the
film takes place on some kind of a screen be it the computer, phone or
television. This subgenre of films made its biggest splash with the release of
*Searching*, a movie with John Cho playing the lead, about a father searching
for his missing daughter.

However, the roots of this subgenre go back way before 2018. The first
documented screen-only movie was *The Collingswood Story*, which is about an
online long-distance relationship gone wrong. It takes place through webcams.
The real wave of this subgenre started about a decade later with the movie
*Unfriended*, which revolved around cyberbullying among high-school students. It
made \$64 million in revenue against a budget of \$1 million. A Russian
director, Timur Bekmambetov co-produced it, thereby beginning his dedication to
this subgenre that he calls *Screen Life*. He produced a sequel to the movie, as
well as *Searching,* and directed one of his own called *Profile.* There were
other short films in and around 2013-2015, which seemingly inspired the TV show
*Modern Family* to go the same route with one of their episodes. It is hailed by
many as one of the best episodes of the show.

The real question, however, is this: is there something much deeper to the
Screen Life or is it just a gimmick to make things flashy? Much of the
information can be revealed without using screens throughout. *Sherlock* was
able to demonstrate it well. The TV show *American Vandal* was themed around
internet culture, and used it to its advantage. Even *13 Reasons Why* could be
credited for the same; one can see that this trend is directed towards
millennials, because their lives revolve around screens the most. Modern
film-making has allowed the blending of actions on the web and reactions to it
for us to simultaneously consume.

These films have much smaller budgets. The return on investment can be immense.
*Searching* made \$75 million against a budget of \$1 million, and *Unfriended*
made 64 times its budget. But is there more to this subgenre than meets the eye?

At first glance, one can see that this style expresses a lot by saying little.
Social media tells us about habits, likes and desires not just of the user but
also of people engaging with said user. It is the rapidity with which the story
gets out that makes screen thrillers this gripping. When people are online and
texting each other, the messages, the time taken to reply, or the choice to not
reply at all, everything leads to some assumptions in both the audience and the
characters. This technique plays upon our conditioning to believe that tiny
things are indicators of something large.

If you want to hide porn from your parents, you naturally put it in some folder
in an extreme corner of the depths of your desktop. And when your parents find
out they are shocked and upset. The way those reactions get captured in a screen
thriller is unparalleled. The screen need not resort to edits or cut-aways to
show the reaction; it is right there. The actor reacts at the same time as the
audience does, they are as much the spectator as we are. The lesser reliance on
cut-aways directly takes the audience on the protagonist’s journey. While not
exclusive to the genre, Screen Life films surely help bring out the often
shocking difference that exists between our lives and our personas, in real life
and online.

These films come attached with a sense of claustrophobia, to say the least. The
screen is crowded with pop-ups, the user keeps switching between tabs and
windows. This adds to not only the pace of the film but also the paranoia of the
viewer. Every step of the way, there lurks a  fear, it is like you are always
waiting for the next development. You are excited for what comes next, no matter
how deeply personal or confidential it might be for the victim. Not that that is
wrong; it is a story, after all. But it does explain something about the human
desire to voyeur over others’ lives; both the good and the bad. As David
Fincher, the director of *The Social Network* says, “People are perverts.” They
want to know the truth, but the kicker is that it will be ugly. Nevertheless,
they will love it.
