---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Understanding the Great Divergence and the Great Convergence"
author: shivang.singh
cover: 2016_BRICS_summit_in_Goa.jpg
tags: economics
date: 2019-03-15 15:18
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b1/2016_BRICS_summit_in_Goa_%281%29.jpg
---
Prior to the beginning of the 19th century, economies around the world were
highly localised and agrarian. Commerce was seemingly restricted to domestic
production and self-consumption, compelling countries to thrive independently;
transnational trade was underdeveloped at the time.  However, with the advent of
the Industrial Revolution in Western Europe around 1760, nations discovered new
methods of production and advanced ways of transportation that employed
inventive machinery and steam power. This facilitated trade by lowering the
costs of moving goods across borders, thus marking the dawn of an age of
globalisation.

Such an unprecedented change in the environment for trade gave way to what
scholars term the “Great Divergence”. Between 1820 and 1990, the Great
Divergence is said to have sponsored a rise in the share of global income going
to the Western world from one-fifth of the total to an estimated two-thirds.
Conversely, however, today that share has plunged to where it was in 1900, thus
representing what academics have named the “Great Convergence”. Identified with
reduced communication costs in addition to low trade costs, the Great
Convergence has endorsed the rapid growth of developing and underdeveloped
countries, collectively bringing them almost at par with the share of global GDP
going to the Western world today.

Throughout the history of humankind, there have been three elaborate phases that
have led to the development of today’s global economy. Phase One, which existed
between 200,000 BCE and 10,000 BCE, was predominantly characterised by the
procurement of food over various seasons and regions. The early man moved around
in search of new locations where he could hunt or cultivate.  Food was the
primary good of exchange. Hence, this phase was characterised by
self-locomotion, rather than the movement of goods. In Phase Two, the global
economy progressed towards localisation, and witnessed the exchange of diverse
goods and services between 10,000 BCE and 1820 CE. Revolutions in agriculture
and science triggered population growth, which led to the formation of
civilisations and food surpluses.  Countries termed the *Ancient Seven* or the
*A7* flourished extensively and witnessed sizeable economic growth. These were
India, China, Egypt, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, and Greece/Italy. It was more
profitable for these countries to manufacture and sell within domestic
territories rather than globally.  Local market conditions determined prices,
while international factors had almost no role to play. Although trade did
emerge with the development of the Silk Route and Spice Route among other means,
globalisation in its modern understanding had not yet begun on account of high
trade costs, high communication costs, and high face-to-face costs. It was only
after 1820 that Phase Three witnessed true globalisation.  

Having harnessed steam power, the Industrial Revolution in Western Europe
emphasised the importance of iron and steel in modern manufacturing while
augmenting the establishment of factories and industrial districts. Production
was micro-clustered to gain from economies of scale by channeling
specialisation, division of labour and better allocation of resources. With the
development of railroads and steamships, trade costs dipped, thus enlarging
international trade volumes significantly. Incomes of Western countries
subsequently diverged and marked the beginning of the Great Divergence. Kenneth
Pomeranz’s book, *The Great Divergence*, is accredited with making the term
popular among business historians and economists.

But, why did the incomes of the West and the Rest diverge? Since 1500, India and
China had been enjoying the largest shares of world output with high per capita
incomes and wealthy trade. What caused the sudden divergence of Western incomes
that led to what some have termed the “North-South income gap”? There are three
prominent explanations. The first explanation stresses on *cultural factors*.
Niall Ferguson, author of *Civilization: West and the Rest*, identifies the
Protestant work ethic as a killer model of capitalist enterprise. The *Group of
Seven* or *G7* countries: United States, Britain, France, Germany, Canada,
Japan, and Italy, underwent rapid industrialization and overtook the *A7* in
world dominance and wealth. The West apparently had the ‘right’ culture while
the Rest had the ‘wrong’ culture for sustenance in the international market post
Phase Three**.** Unsurprisingly, this explanation is highly contested and lacks
adequate evidence for its validity.

The second explanation highlights *institutional factors*. It is said that the
West had at its disposal, access to better institutions and progressive
political establishments, thus facilitating faster growth in the modern era. On
the contrary, countries like India suffered adverse colonial rule while
countries like China witnessed regular instabilities with changing regimes and
leaders.  Similarly, the legal systems in *G7* countries were more advanced and
accountable relative to their *A7* counterparts. There is sufficient evidence to
back these claims, however, the Great Divergence was not entirely based on the
foundations of this explanation. And reinforcing this criticism, the final
explanation talks about *educational factors* as determinants of global wealth
and poverty.  

As Claudia Goldin claims in the research paper *The Human-Capital Century and
American Leadership:* “the unique egalitarian mass provision of post-elementary
schooling achieved in the United States during the early twentieth century”
validates the educational superiority of the West compared to the Rest. Western
Europe and North America witnessed higher literacy rates and more spending on
education in the modern era, thus augmenting their abilities in trade and
commerce.

I would say that the harmonisation of all these factors can be said to have led
to the Great Divergence. For most of the modern era, the West outshone the Rest
in all three – cultural, institutional, and educational factors. But then, what
really led to the Great Convergence? Was it the West that lost pace or the Rest
that gathered it?  Well, both happened simultaneously…

 

The growth of the West is said to have slowed down after attaining a certain
degree of development, while growth of the Rest is said to have sped up so as to
attain that certain degree of development. The mutual decrease in trade and
communication costs is what facilitated the Great Convergence. With the advent
of information technology, the cost of moving *ideas* across borders, besides
*goods*, fell significantly. This made it possible for multinational firms to
shift labour-intensive work to underdeveloped and developing nations, thus
saving private as well as social costs. However, in order to preserve and
maintain the entire production process, in addition to outsourcing jobs, these
firms also had to transfer their technical, managerial, financial, and marketing
know-how to these countries – mainly the currently *Industrialising Six* or *I6*
– China, India, Poland, Korea, Thailand, and Indonesia.  

 

The West aimed at gaining from the unification of advanced technology and
skilled workers, both of which were easily and economically available in these
countries. While this promoted the industrialisation of the *I6*, it also
triggered the deindustrialisation of the *G7*. Moreover, towards the end of the
20th century, *I6* countries began investing considerably in improving their
institutions and extending education to more citizens. Most exploited countries
were no longer under colonial rule; there was more political stability within
nations and greater international peace after the Second World War. These
factors collectively helped developing countries amplify their growth, and
secure higher incomes with better standards of living for their people.
Therefore, investment brought into developing countries by developed ones, and
self-investment by developing countries themselves, are what mutually led to a
decline in the Western share of global GDP and a convergence of income
inequalities between the global North and South. The stagnated and shrunken
economies of China and India, among others, in the *I6* revived remarkably.  

Today, *I6* countries and *G7* countries enjoy more or less the same share of
global income and output.  Although the *G7* might still be richer than the
*I6*, they no longer treasure the dominance that they once did. Poverty in
developing countries is on the fall owing to an increase in employment and
improved quality of life. Contrastingly, wealth in developed countries is on the
fall owing to debt burdens, reduced employment, brain-drain, and monetary
advances to the rest of the world.  

We may affirm that the two final phases in the evolution of globalisation were
responsible for both the Great Divergence and the Great Convergence; only these
two phases differed vastly from one another. The former of the two phases
witnessed the growth of the Asian economies until the 19th century, after which
the European-Atlantic Economy surpassed the income levels and growth rates
prevalent in pre-modern Asia. The latter of the two phases is accredited with
subduing the growth of modern European-Atlantic countries, while elevating Asian
ones to better income levels and improved growth rates. This reversed cycle
confirms that both phases of globalisation are opposite to each other in nature.
Currently, we live in its second phase attributed to advanced information
technology and global income parity. And there is no better way to end this
economic-history article than asking, “*What Next?”*
