---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Only I Exist"
author: namya.tewari
cover: solipsism.jpg
tags: society
date: 2019-08-01 11:45
link: https://www.flickr.com/photos/marieswartz/3369400712
---
Questions have been the very heart and soul of philosophy and, unlike any other
discipline, it has raised more questions than it has answered. The dire
intellectual need to discern the abstract, in the form of reality and truth,
consumes all thinkers alike. They all seek answers that spring from an objective
source to bring an end to the seemingly perpetual quest for knowledge. However,
it is not that simple. Philosophy, over the years, has gotten mired down in
countless irrefutable hypotheses, thriving on the body of possibilities and
reason. This is especially true of metaphysical discussions, which have resulted
in the blossoming of unconventional, at times, bizarre theories to explain
reality.

What is *real*? One way to grasp reality amounts to the way you understand the
world external to you. But what if that understanding is faulty? Take, for
instance, the understanding of the earth as a flat disc. Today we can ‘claim to
know’ that the earth is spherical, yet in those times the supposed axiom of the
earth being flat was the foundational truth on which the early peoples developed
an understanding of other concepts and ideas. This is disconcerting, because
there’s a pretty high possibility of us assuming a false belief as an
irrefutable fact, because although there are proofs to make claims, science per
se isn’t perfect, just workable. 

Let us now go even further to understand the concept of matter that we *assume*
to be real. As Bertrand Russell discussed in his *Problems of Philosophy*,
whatever we perceive is the mere appearance of an object, as opposed to its
reality. The surface of an apple that is seen with the naked eye is very
different when viewed under the microscope, its colour varies with the changing
source of light too. In short, what your perception leads you into believing is
real is actually nothing but the appearance of the apple, in varying degrees of
magnification. If this is the case, then the existence of the apple becomes
questionable. Does an *actual* apple exist at all? 

For some, it does not. A philosopher named Bishop Berkeley, for instance, argued
in favour of *immaterialism* – that rather than being a form of matter, an apple
in actuality is the amalgamation of several qualities which cannot exist
independent of the mind. You can test this, try defining an apple devoid of its
qualities and properties. It is almost impossible to do so. So are the qualities
(of the objects) that we perceive in the universe, are they created by our
imagination or do they exist as a comprehensive whole contained in an underlying
substratum called matter? This is the starting point of the idea of ‘solipsism.’

Solipsism revolves around the idea that only I exist and weave the fabric of my
reality. The *certainty* I can ascribe to my experience is limited to my *own*
existence and thoughts, everything else in this world, including the existence
of this article, is doubtable. This may seem very absurd to hear, at first, but
it's a possibility that is hard to deny.

The empirical experiences one goes through forms an essential part of their own
subjective reality. One can, in no way validate the experience of anybody else
(egocentric predicament). One’s understanding of the apple is theirs alone and
cannot be grasped by anyone else. The comprehension of all that is external to
their consciousness is beyond their ability.

Thus, your thoughts and ideas are the only undisputed and obvious entities that
exist. This is to say that all humans have their own psychological conceptions
whose understanding is forbidden to others. And so, we cannot be certain of the
independent existence of other bodies and minds.

The theory of solipsism has subtly remained embedded in other philosophical
ideas. One such idea was propounded by Rene Descartes’ principle of “*Cogito,
ergo sum*” (I think, therefore I am). Descartes was convinced that he was being
deceived, by an evil genius, into believing some essentially flawed concepts as
true. Maintaining that every thought is dubitable, he cleansed his mind of all
distortions and came up with the most irrefutable, indubitable truth (as the
basic frame of reference to understand all the other truths)- “I think therefore
I am.” 

Solipsism takes this idea of *Cogito* way too seriously. Nothing but the mind is
true for the solipsist. While Descartes did believe in rationality and
mathematics as a means to search for truth, for the solipsist (metaphysically
and epistemologically) such conceptions are your own inventions, something you
make up in your head, bereft of any independent existence (here your
consciousness shall assume the place of Descartes’ demon). One can understand it
as a perpetual state of hallucination, characterised by vivid details. If you
are a solipsist, then whatever you experience, this article, your friends,
family, nature, all the coolest things in the world are actually an invention of
your own! An understanding of the world devoid of the ego is impossible.

However fascinating it may sound, solipsism has some dire outcomes, when
accepted as a lifestyle choice. It possesses the potential to throw the world
into utter chaos. Since everything that one sees around them is a creation of
their imagination, they would have all the power of calling the shots and
asserting their dominance over the entire world around them. Morality and ethics
would lose their credibility and an individual’s will would determine the fate
of all that is around them. Or else, it could make a person abnegate everything,
despairing about the loneliness they experience every second of their existence,
since they have no proof of the existence of any other. Either way, solipsism
could inflict more harm than good.

Difficult to refute, solipsism continues to haunt the imagination of humankind.
However, rejecting the theory altogether wouldn’t be right either, given the
crucial questions it raises on reality and the foundations of epistemological
speculations. The question of solipsism has stirred minds and propelled
philosophy from a state of certainty to that of unpredictability, thereby adding
profundity and beauty to the subject. And as long as such ingenious thoughts
continue to flow in the body of philosophy, the answer to this problem, along
with all problems, I believe, is not too far away.
