---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Of Diplomacy, Domination and the South China Sea"
author: gurleen.kaur
cover: navy-ship.jpg
pic1: South_China_Sea_claims_map.jpg
tags: policy
date: 2019-08-10
link: https://cdn1.i-scmp.com/sites/default/files/styles/1200x800/public/images/methode/2019/02/19/761fdce8-2e6d-11e9-80ef-0255f1ad860b_image_hires_092316.JPG?itok=wE16uTrM&v=1550539400
---

In his book, *On China*, notable American diplomat Henry Kissinger wrote, “The
highest form of warfare is to attack [the enemy’s] Strategy itself; the next, to
attack [his] Alliances. The next, to attack Armies”. As elaborated by Kissinger,
China seems to be following the art of strategic encirclement in diplomacy’s new
theatre, the South China Sea.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/de/South_China_Sea_claims_map.jpg" target="_blank"><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>


**Geography**

The South China Sea is a part of the Pacific Ocean, with the Strait of Taiwan in
the Northeast and the Straits of Malacca in the Southwest (as shown in the map).
The littoral countries of this disputed sea are China, Taiwan, Philippines,
Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, Singapore, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam.

The primary island chains in the South China Sea are The Paracel, the Pratas and
Spratly Islands. The Scarborough Shoal, a triangle-shaped chain of reefs and
rocks with a total area of 150 square kilometres, is another important
geographical entity. 

**The Conflict**

Till the end of World War II, not a single island in the South China Sea had
been occupied. In 1947, China demarcated its claims over the South China Sea
with a U-shaped line made up of eleven dashes, covering almost the entire area.
Newer dimensions were added to the conflict following the formation of Taiwan in
1949.  In 1953, the *nine-dash line* prevailed over the earlier eleven dashes,
when China withdrew its claim over the Gulf of Tonkin. The claimed area
stretches from Hainan Island, covering Paracel and Spratly Islands which
comprise over 90% of the South China Sea. On diplomatic fora, China justifies
its claim stating the Treaty of Tientsin with France after the Sino-French War
in 1885, and the Cairo and Potsdam declarations after the defeat of Japan in
World War II. 

Claimants for the Paracel Islands include Taiwan, Vietnam and China. Vietnam
cites 17th century, Vietnamese scholar Do Ba to justify the fact that it once
actively ruled over Paracel and Spratly islands, and thus has territorial rights
over them. As for the Pratas Islands, they are administered by Taiwan but
claimed by China. Malaysia and Brunei also claim the territory that falls in
their exclusive economic zones. While Malaysia claims some islands in Spratly,
Brunei does not. Philippines, Taiwan and China claim the Scarborough Shoal,
which China also calls the Huangyan Island.

**Importance of the South China Sea**

The South China Sea is an important trade route, supporting trade worth \$5
trillion. Secondly, it is a rich source of hydrocarbons and is an abundant
fishing ground. According to the United States Energy Information Agency, there
are 11 billion barrels of oil and 190 trillion cubic feet of natural gas in
deposits under the South China Sea. Its fisheries account for 10% of the global
total.

The South China Sea holds strategic importance for China for two more reasons.
First, China is dependent upon West Asia for its energy needs. The trade via sea
has many choke points like the Straits of Malacca, Sunda Strait and Lombok
Strait that have remained blocked in the past. This proved harmful for China and
thus domination of the sea would be pre-emptive action to save this important
route. Secondly, aggressive posturing in the South China Sea would help China
enhance its domination in the Indian Ocean. This would be a countermeasure to
the United States’ growing hegemony in the Indo-Pacific region.

**Vietnam-China Dispute**

In 1974, China and South Vietnam fought the battle for Paracel Islands. China
won and took over the entire archipelago. Following the Vietnam War, North
Vietnam, which earlier supported China’s claim, put forth a united front against
Chinese domination. As discussed earlier, Vietnam claims the Paracel Islands and
denounces the violation of Vietnam's sovereignty by the forceful occupation of
these islands. In 1988, another standoff occurred following a skirmish between
Vietnamese and Chinese soldiers over the [Johnson South
Reef](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnson_South_Reef) in the [Spratly
Islands](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spratly_Islands) that killed 64
Vietnamese.

The 2014 China-Vietnam Oil rig crisis heightened tensions relating to the
ownership of islands in the South China Sea. On May 2, 2014, China National
Offshore Oil Corporation moved its \$1 billion *Hai Yang Shi You 981* oil rig to
a location closer to the [Triton
Island](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triton_Island)s, the southwestern-most
island of the Paracels. The location was near Vietnam’s hydrocarbon blocks 142
and 143. Vietnam protested by sending 29 ships to disrupt the rig’s operations.
The tensions at sea led to anti-China protests in Vietnam which escalated into
riots. Many foreign businesses and Chinese workers were subjected to looting and
vandalism. On July 15, China National Offshore Oil Corporation withdrew one
month earlier than originally announced, defusing the crisis.

In July 2019, a large-scale standoff took place between the coast guard ships of
China and Vietnam when a Chinese oil exploration ship entered disputed waters
near the Spratly Islands. Vietnam demanded an immediate withdrawal, while China
refused to do so, leading to another dispute between the nations. 

**China-Philippines Dispute**

Until 2012, Philippines exercised de-facto control over the shoal. The 2012
Scarborough standoff was initiated when the Philippines accused Chinese
fishermen of illegally collecting corals, giant clams and live sharks. Following
a tense standoff wherein the Chinese vessels refused to leave the shoal, the
unsuccessful bilateral negotiations forced the Philippines to back off. China
gained control and drove Filipino fishermen away from Scarborough Shoal. In
2013, the Philippines took China to the Permanent Court of Arbitration, to
challenge the *nine-dash line* that violated the Philippines' sovereignty under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas (1982). The court ruled
that China had violated the Philippines' sovereign waters as the *nine-dash
line* included the Scarborough Shoal and the Philippines' Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ). China outrightly rejected the ruling and refused to vacate the
Scarborough Shoal, questioning the court’s 'jurisdiction'. Philippines rejoiced
this judgement as the '[trial of the
century](https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2016/07/philippines-wins-trial-century-160714115011745.html)'.

Despite the ruling of the Hague tribunal, China continues to violate the
Philippines' Exclusive Economic Zone and engages in overfishing. On June 9,
2019, a Chinese vessel was involved in a boat ramming incident, which threatened
the lives of 22 Filipino fishermen. In another incident in late July, 113
Chinese fishing vessels were spotted near the Philippine-administered Pag-asa
Island in the Spratly archipelago. 

Despite continuous violations, the Malacañang seems to be wanting warmer ties
with its Chinese counterpart. President Duterte recently revealed that he had
reached a 'verbal agreement' with President Xi, for allowing Chinese fishermen
in the Philippines EEZ. As a part of Duterte’s bilateral visit to China in 2018,
a preliminary agreement was reached for oil and gas exploration in the South
China Sea. Critics smell foul play at the increasing proximity and condemn
Duterte for failing to act on the Philippines' arbitral victory. The reason for
this shift is attributed to China’s economic clout and growing investments in
the infrastructure sector, essential to support the Philippines' economy. 

The aspiring hegemon is proactively utilising money diplomacy to win strategic
partners. According to reports, a secret deal was signed with Cambodia to allow
Chinese forces to use the Ream naval base. As in the Philippines, Chinese funded
soft loans and investment in Cambodian infrastructure projects have brought
‘warmth’ to the bilateral ties. Encirclement Attack is the norm being adopted by
China, and how the nation’s money diplomacy further polarises the South China
Sea dispute would be something to watch out for.
