---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: The Picture of Dorian Gray
author: olly.bowes
cover: assets/images/Dorian.jpg
pic1: assets/images/Dorian1.png
pic2: assets/images/Dorian2.png
pic3: assets/images/Dorian3.png
pic4: assets/images/Dorian4.png
pic5: assets/images/Dorian5.png
tags: culture
date: 2019-02-05
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/64/Opium_smoking_1874.jpg
---
Several years ago, in quite another place, I began work upon the largest
compositional process I have ever undergone. I seemed to get it into my head as
I prepared to spend a year waving my hands at the poor, unfortunate singers of
St Mark’s Anglican Church, Florence, that I was far enough developed as a
composer that I could write for myself an opera. Not only that, but that I could
distil on my own one of the great works of Victorian literature, Oscar Wilde’s
*The Picture of Dorian Gray* into a stage-show that would combine the sparkle of
*Die Fledermaus* or *Figaro* with the grim horror of one of Britten’s darker
dramas, *The Turn of the Screw* or perhaps *Owen Wingrave*. I was mistaken. It
took a chance encounter with one Jamie Fox, who had had similar ideas of taking
some time out in that magnificent Tuscan city, to turn my fantasy of an opera
into a more cohesive reality. Over several Negroni-fuelled evenings, and many
more ale-fuelled ones since our return to the UK, we translated Wilde’s
effervescent and yet shockingly terror-filled novella into a two-and-a-half act
show that now, slightly over three years later, has not only reached its
completion, but is, even as we speak, being prepared to be brandished before the
public by the wonderful people at *LoveOpera*.

Therefore, no small part of me is turned towards retrospection: three years ago,
almost to the day of writing, I was asked by Jay Wolfe of *The Wolfian* to write
a small article on the subject of setting about composing something of this
magnitude. I did my best – I had, at that point, only just finished *Dorian*’s
Prologue (the –and-a-half act) and had only vague ideas what the rest of the
opera had in store for me. Nevertheless, I now look back upon that article and
see that there is a compositional thread that stayed with me throughout the
process, even from the pre-Foxian beginnings. I knew then as I know now that
Wilde's novella brought together the myriad elements of philosophy, dark humour,
and gothic horror. Musically, that meant each of these strands had to be
individually emphasised without any single one dominating the general effect of
the music. Of course, this was no easy task. But I did find a solution, if I can
really claim to have one. I studied closely how the likes of Henry Purcell,
Benjamin Britten, Claude Debussy, and Richard Wagner musically synthesised
various themes in their operas. I also made it a point to follow the man
himself: Oscar Wilde, taking note of how he balanced these themes to create such
a fine piece of art.

I feel that there is a fortunate divide between the Prologue of the work and the
two Acts. It is a divide that I touched on in my previous article: much of the
dialogue of the Prologue, taken from the first two chapters of Wilde’s work,
consists of Basil, the painter, philosophising with his friend Lord Henry, the
prime corruptive influence upon young Dorian before the boy actually arrives to
kick-start the drama. This leads to moments of the Prologue that feel somewhat
slower than the rest of the show, a turgid calm before a hopefully more driving
roller-coaster of a storm. And I believe this is as it should be, but I may well
be wrong – I shall have to see after I hear from the audiences in July and
September.

However, as the previous article focussed so heavily upon the Prologue, on
account of the fact that neither of the other two acts actually yet existed, I
feel it may be much more suitable for us now to turn ourselves to a brief
musical guided tour, as it were, through at least some of the show. Therefore,
some introductions must be made:

*Dorian* has a main cast of six – it was quite a task to reduce down the large,
high-society focused drama into six characters, but what else is a chorus for?

The characters are, in order of appearance:

Basil Hallward, (tenor) - the artist who holds Dorian as his muse,
unfortunately;

Lord Henry “Harry” Wotton, (baritone) - a modern-day Mephistopheles with a
heart, somewhere deep down in there;

Dorian himself, (mezzo-soprano) - I had this idea when watching Mozart’s
*Marriage of Figaro* and realising Dorian and the teenage sex-pest Cherubino,
also a trouser-role, are not so very different if you gave the latter money and
immortality;

Lady Victoria Wotton, (soprano) - aside from a few witty flashes in the novella,
Henry’s wife is reduced to acting off-screen, as it were. Jamie and I changed
that, as you will see;

Sybil Vane, (soprano) – Poor Sybil. To fall in love with an as-yet not fully
corrupted Dorian, only to so quickly jilted after one bad night on the stage;

James Vane, (bass) – Sybil’s brother arrives in the 2nd Act, and will avenge his
sister… or, at least, he’ll try his utmost, raging best.

Behind these six there comes a host of minor characters that make up our show’s
chorus: the society lords and ladies, the audience of a run-down theatre, the
whores and opium fiends that make up the rich tapestry that is Victorian London
in Oscar’s (and our) minds.

And so Act one begins, with Dorian, now in possession of Basil’s masterful
portrait of him, sitting alone in Lord Henry’s living-room, awaiting his friend.
It is here that I can illustrate the first influence of any of the composers
mentioned in my previous article: the act opens with a harp gesture (Fig. 1)
that is at once a textural back-cloth for the scene, and also acts as a
leitmotif, to borrow from Richard Wagner’s vocabulary. The theme, extended by
the strings and later the flute, can be said, therefore to be a genius loci – it
represents the building, musically, suggesting the luxurious, lavish
surroundings of the Wottons’ town-house. When, therefore, it reappears to
introduce use to Dorian’s own house, in both acts one and two, it possibly tells
us something about Dorian’s own following of Henry’s teachings – indeed, this
ability to manipulate melodies is an incredibly useful tool, compositionally, as
melodies are often indelibly linked with the emotion, location or character
alongside which they first appear. Thus, the twisting of a motif by introducing
it to a new context can suggest many things to an audience – watch out for it!

<div class="caption"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%" /><b>Figure 1</b></div>

Next, we hear Henry’s own leitmotif, languorous triplets in the horns, except
this time it isn’t Henry, but his wife, whom neither we nor Dorian are expecting
to see. She has some interesting things to say on the subject of Wagner, too: “I
like Wagner’s music more than anyone’s. It is so loud that one can talk the
whole time without other people hearing what you say!” (I must say, I hope no
one uses *Dorian* to gossip under!) Nevertheless, as Victoria is here only for
some witty repartee and to avoid her husband at this point in the drama, when
Henry does finally show up she departs in short order – it’s not the healthiest
of relationships.

Henry’s real entrance is accompanied by a different sort of music, though. He’s
a little drunk, and announces himself with a lop-sided little fanfare, before
launching in a duettino of banter with Dorian, which again manipulates his own
triplet motif into some fast-paced patter, as Dorian tells us that he has fallen
in rapturously love with an actress, “a rather commonplace debut” as Henry puts
it, named Sybil Vane. This confession leads to the first overtly romantic music
of the evening, as Dorian narrates how he came across his new sweetheart in a
sequence that is, structurally, a reflection of the early-Verdian style of
cantabile-cabaletta, but turned entirely on its head: in Verdi, or indeed,
Donizetti or Bellini, a cantabile-cabaletta consists of (as the name suggests) a
slow, more relaxed section that is very ‘sing-able’ followed by a more
barnstorming or pyrotechnic section. However, here Dorian sings them the wrong
way ‘round: first a fast, rhythmically twisting section (Fig. 2) describing her
beauty, and then two slower sections discussing first her acting ability and
then how lost he is in the romance of it all (Fig. 3), before the scene peters
out, and we transition to the next night, at the theatre


<div class="caption"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic2 }}" style="width:100%"/><b>Figure 2</b></div>

<div class="caption"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic3 }}" style="width:100%" /><b>Figure 3</b></div>


Ah, the theatre scene. This was a lot of fun to devise – I recall Jamie
gesticulating wildly as he explained to me that this was to be no great work of
Shakespearean spectacle, but a farcical experience, with a wooden, nervous
Juliet and a stout, middle-aged Romeo with a bit too much gut and far too much
Brian Blessed. And in the midst of it all sits Dorian, trying desperately to
convince Henry and Basil that Sybil is, in truth, a wonderful actress and well
worth his love. Therefore, I put my comedy hat on, and have tried to construct a
woeful imitation of Gilbert and Sullivan as an overture to this
play-within-a-play. There is no emotional core to this moment, no attempt to tug
at the heart-strings as one would expect from an overture to a performance of
*Romeo and Juliet*. It’s just dross. As is the acting that follows it, but for
that I had to get more creative.

<div class="caption"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic4 }}" style="width:100%" /><b>Figure 4</b></div>


First, I set up a sense of scurrying tension within the on-stage audience by way
of a tiny fragment of melody that, when repeated over and over, becomes an
ostinato-texture which, much like the harp motif of Fig. 1, serves as a backdrop
for the entire scene. Over this, both our trio and the on-stage audience mutter
between each other until the curtain comes up and we see a sequence of three
scenes from the play, each successively worse: steadily, we progress from thin,
dull orchestration and bad singing, add in meandering, meaningless chromaticism
and unstable harmonies, and finally top it all off with some bombastic as the
crowd get steadily more unimpressed with the performance (Fig. 4).

I think I write quite good ‘bad’ music, sometimes…

Ultimately, Basil and Henry resolve to leave before the end of the show and
leave Dorian behind to talk to poor Sybil. Poor Sybil who is, in point of fact,
much more vivacious in real life than she ever was on stage, and so very much in
love with Dorian, as illustrated by her motif, which is itself an extension of
Dorian and the portrait’s own melody (Fig. 5, showing Dorian’s melody on top,
and Sybil’s extension below it), before flourishing into a much more lush
romantic gesture, and finally a re-hashing of one of Dorian’s own earlier
cantabile sections. She is so consumed by what could kindly be called her
infatuation or, worse, obsession with Dorian that she does not create her own
music, merely adopts his. And yet, in his refusal, Dorian himself mimics Henry’s
own more impassioned music from the Prologue; neither of them is, in truth, free
from obsessive thoughts about another person, or the ideals that they represent.
Unfortunately for Sybil, Dorian’s ideals lead him to abandon her, storm out,
have a wild night on the town before returning to his house, alone.

<div class="caption"><img src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic5 }}" style="width:100%" /><b>Figure 5</b></div>

To cap the act off, Jamie and I had a bit of a predicament: the novella contains
a long time-skip before a certain climactic scene that we both wanted to include
as the finale of Act One. Whilst this reads incredibly well on paper – as the
years pass, Dorian becomes more and more corrupt until he goes beyond the pale –
this does not work near so well on a stage, where the audience is best served by
having a cohesive narrative, at least according to critics as far back as
Aristotle and the classical unities (of action, time and place). Thus, we
conflated several scenes from the book in order to make this finale to Act One
as impactful as can be. As Dorian recovers from his hangover, portrayed by slow,
chromatic triplet descents, his torpor is interrupted by the arrival of Basil,
who has bad news. This is the first change, as Wilde has Henry come to Dorian’s
house to deliver this particular news – that Sybil has committed suicide. Basil
is, therefore, able to finally act more overtly and lovingly towards his muse.
This also sets up a further conflation, as there are two scenes of Basil, in his
moralising fashion, trying to help Dorian. In the one, he asks to see the
portrait and is rebuffed, and on the other, many years later, Dorian crosses a
line. Basil is never seen again.

As we conflated these three scenes into one, I introduced, musically, one last
thing: the poor soprano playing Sybil would otherwise have only two scenes, and,
feeling sorry for her, I wrote her voice into the scene. Dorian, so affected by
the news of her death, can almost hear her calling out to him, turning a duet
into a trio, and having the final action of the scene, and indeed of the first
half of the Opera, become the deaths of two of *Dorian*’s principals (Game of
Thrones style). I don’t believe I know of another opera where both the tenor and
the soprano are killed before we make it half-way. That ought to make an impact
– and hopefully leave the audience as eager to see the conclusion of the drama
as you may well be to read the final instalment of this little-guided tour
through my opera!
