---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Can Minimum Wage Reduce Poverty?"
author: shivang.singh
cover: assets/images/Laborers_Liberation.jpg
tags: economics
date: 2019-03-08 23:45
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/dc/Buchenwald_Slave_Laborers_Liberation.jpg/947px-Buchenwald_Slave_Laborers_Liberation.jpg
---
<em>A guide to its effective implementation…</em>

The minimum wage in the United Kingdom is considered one of the most successful
government policies ever implemented. It was intricately planned and structured
over a significant length of time. And with one of the lowest unemployment rates
in Europe, Britain, at first sight, appears to illustrate an accurate balance
between executing a minimum wage policy and preserving the uniform availability
of job opportunities (even if Brexit could change that drastically). Apart from
Britain, even Hong Kong has witnessed an upward trend in median monthly wages of
unskilled workers by 43% in money terms and 20% in real terms between 2010 and
2014. Synchronously, the 2014 Report on Annual Earnings and Hours Survey
published by The Census and Statistics Department outlines inputs from the
Minimum Wage Commission that indicate a fall in the unemployment rate for
elementary occupations from 4.4% in 2010 to 3.3% in 2014. Advocates of minimum
wage legislation argue that it can alter the income distribution in favour of
the low-paid labour force by attenuating the bottom tail of the distribution
model. Opponents criticise its “Disemployment Effect” and emphasise that it
might shrink the share of earnings going to the impoverished and destitute
workforce.

A higher minimum wage, evidently, increases costs for firms. This may curtail
them from hiring the exceptionally low-wage, low-skill workers. David Neumark,
an American labour economist, terms this the “Disemployment Effect”. It is
characterised by the loss of jobs, reduction in working hours, automation, or
the struggle to enter into new jobs. The Disemployment Effect, if necessitated
by a minimum wage, invalidates the purpose of bringing in such a policy in the
first place. But this effect can be overcome. Firms can be offered economic
incentives such as subsidies and grants, to compensate for their increased
costs. Lower taxes and excise duties could also serve as economic incentives,
ensuring more cash is available for businesses to absorb the costs of paying a
higher minimum wage.

However, the Disemployment Effect is not the only uncertain outcome of a minimum
wage policy, especially in developing countries. As the minimum wage and poverty
lines are closer to each other in developing nations, an increase in minimum
wage could lift workers out of destitution. Yet, several minimum wage workers in
developing countries are young, work part-time, and belong to high-income
households. Correspondingly, most households in poverty seldom have anyone in
the workforce**.** Hence, more often than not, a minimum wage ends up helping
the privileged and ignoring the needy.

To end poverty, a minimum wage should be determined for households and not
individuals. This will facilitate the redistribution of income to poor families
over low-earners of rich families. Simultaneously, governments must increase
spending on education and skill development to build an economy with a speedily
employable workforce, hence fostering growth and development. A minimum wage
policy also needs to tackle the problem of incomplete and irregular legal
coverage. Although minimum wages seem to be extensively applicable, in several
cases the coverage is ineffective and disregards those most in need of social
security, such as domestic workers or homeworkers. By neglecting a few crucial
sectors of the economy, we fail to fully utilise the potential of minimum wage
legislation. Even though legal coverage of the minimum wage developed from the
mid-2000’s to the late 2000’s in India and South Africa, it covered only about
70% of low-paid workers by late 2000’s; in Peru, domestic workers were barred
from the statutory minimum wage**.** Research suggests that weak legal coverage
may at times ignore around one-third of all wage earners.

We may confront this perplexity by undertaking comprehensive legislation that
gratifies all sectors of an economy, and by ensuring that such legislation is
strictly enforced. This, while a herculean task, can be accomplished by the
extensive and intensive consultation of all stakeholders and a thorough analysis
of a variety of socioeconomic and employment data.

The minimum wage is fast becoming a universally adopted policy today and the
principal question is how to operate the system in order to maximise its
benefits. A conscientiously devised minimum wage policy can relegate low pay,
inequalities, and poverty, at little or no adverse cost to employment. Yet, the
minimum wage either continues to be low in many countries, or applies solely to
certain select sectors. But with a little more fine-tuning, as I have suggested,
I believe it is possible to shape an effective minimum wage policy that
successfully reduces poverty and income inequalities across countries without
hurting the job market.
