---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Industrial Corridors in India: A New Vehicle for Industrialisation"
author: manya.manushi
cover: Delhi_Airport.jpg
pic1: Industrial_Corridors.png
tags: economics
date: 2019-04-19 23:00
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Industrial_Park_Haryana_India_near_NH_11_Highway_and_Delhi_Airport_March_2015.jpg/1024px-Industrial_Park_Haryana_India_near_NH_11_Highway_and_Delhi_Airport_March_2015.jpg
---

According to a Briefing Paper prepared for the UK’s House of Commons, China’s
share as a percentage of world manufacturing is 20% and as a percentage of its
GDP, it is 27%. In contrast, for India, the corresponding figures stand dismally
at 4% and 16% respectively. The Report has taken manufacturing output in 2015 as
the basis, using 2005 exchange rates. The burgeoning services sector
contribution to India’s GDP during the last decade has gone past 60%, whereas
the contribution of manufacturing activity to GDP has remained virtually
stagnant. This clearly indicates that India has been quick to adopt
technological advances in the services sector, but has failed to encourage
manufacturing entrepreneurship. Over the years, a clear need has been felt to
boost manufacturing activity in India. Mass consumerization of Indian society
due to rising disposable income and increased rural electrification have led to
a rise in demand for electronic consumer goods. It is expected to reach ₹3.15
trillion in the year 2022. If quality domestic products are not available,
people will buy imported goods. All this has further added to the necessity of
manufacturing led industrialisation.

In order to boost domestic manufacturing, the Indian Government tried to emulate
the Chinese experience as China had immensely benefited from its SEZ (Special
Economic Zones) policy. On similar lines, India enacted the SEZ Act in 2005.
However, Indian SEZs lacked the all-important connectivity to ports and thus,
failed to augment manufacturing activity in the country. It is this realisation
that has resulted in the introduction of the concept of industrial corridors
that is modelled on similar corridors in Japan and China.

**What is an Industrial Corridor?**

An industrial corridor or economic corridor is a pathway comprising
manufacturing clusters, ancillary units and smart cities connected with rail,
road, air or sea links. The Indian government has envisaged five integrated
industrial corridors across the country in partnership with the respective State
governments. The National Industrial Corridor Development & Implementation Trust
(NICDIT) has been established as the apex body to oversee development of all
industrial corridors across the country.

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="http://www.dmicdc.com/about-DMICDC" target="_blank" ><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%"/></a><b>Source:</b> http://www.dmicdc.com/about-DMICDC
</div>


**Industrial Corridor as Wheels of Progress**

Industrial corridors recognise the interdependence of various sectors of the
economy and offer effective integration between industry and infrastructure
leading to overall socio-economic development. Industrial corridors lead to the
creation of state-of-art infrastructure such as high-speed transportation
(rail/road) networks, ports with advanced cargo handling equipment, modern
airports, special economic regions/ industrial areas, logistic parks, etc. that
are focused on fulfilling the requirements of the industry.

The late C.K. Prahalad, a renowned management expert, had said that over the
next three decades if India does not create new cities to accommodate a whopping
500 million people desirous of urban life, every existing city would become a
slum. The establishment of manufacturing zones along the industrial corridors
will prevent distress migration and provide people with job opportunities close
to their dwelling place. The new smart cities created will mark the beginning of
a new wave of urbanisation in India and reduce pressure on existing cities.

The buzz word connecting the various programmes PM of Modi's Government - Make
in India, Digital India, and Skill India - is employment generation. Smart
cities and industrial corridors are no exceptions. The educational institutions,
roads, railways, airports, hospitals that will come up in these corridors is
expected to generate employment and raise the overall standard of living. The
government is targeting 100 million new jobs through industrial corridors.  

**The Way Forward**

‘The wheels of progress’ are encountering a plethora of issues on their road to
success, however. Of all the issues, acquisition of land at a snail’s pace is
the single biggest concern owing to the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. To
take an example, the \$100-billion Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) was
expected to be completed in three phases spread over nine years starting from
January 2008. However, owing to mostly land acquisition issues, the first phase
is likely to be completed by December 2019 and revised deadlines for the second
phase and third phase have already been shifted to 2027 and 2037. The
governments at both India's Central and State levels need to work out a
comprehensive land acquisition policy and not approach this issue in a piecemeal
manner.

Secondly, as India lacks technological expertise, it is prudent to bring in
foreign direct investment through established foreign entities that have the
required skill. At the same time, it is also important to encourage Indian
investment in setting up ancillary units in the same sector. This will provide
for smooth backward integration by ensuring regular supply of raw materials and
forward integration by providing ready markets. For example, the Chennai to
Bengaluru defence production corridor in India's southern States will pass
through towns such as Trichy, Coimbatore, Salem and Hosur and will connect
ordnance factories and defence public sector units to ancillary units (which are
small and medium scale industries in the said corridor). The supplies from these
units to factories and Public Sector Undertakings is an example of forward
integration and purchases by the latter is backward integration.

Thirdly, in order to encourage FDI, the government needs to rationalise the tax
structure. India’s corporate tax rate is high in comparison to many ASEAN
countries and stands at 30%. It is 20% in Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam.
Moreover, India also has very high import tariffs that make manufacturing of
products with imported components economically unviable or expensive as compared
to countries like Taiwan. To achieve success, the government should rationalise
the tariff structure, realising that it is export promotion not import
prevention that actually benefits an economy.

The strategy of industrial corridors is poised to develop a sound industrial
base, characterised by excellent infrastructure and uninhibited growth of
manufacturing. However, all this would remain only rhetoric if stumbling blocks
are not removed and issues plaguing industrial corridor projects are not
resolved. This requires a holistic approach and involvement of all the
government departments, stakeholders such as farmers from whom land is to be
acquired, manufacturers who would be setting units for production, transport
operators, etc. With the onset of election season in India, it would be naive to
assume anyone has the time to truly calibrate policy, but with a new Government
and new ambitions post elections, one can only hope that the Industrial
Corridors project will take on new heights.  
