---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Shutting Out The Sun? On a New Kind of Loneliness"
author: harshita.jain
cover: hikikomori.jpg
tags: society
date: 2019-05-03 2:00
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Hikikomori%2C_Hiasuki%2C_2004.jpg/1024px-Hikikomori%2C_Hiasuki%2C_2004.jpg
---
I’m sure we’ve all had days when we don’t want to leave the house, perhaps even
our rooms. It’s not unheard of for a person to take a day off and do nothing,
but then, we all have a limit to all or any of it. After a while, someone is
probably going to call out for you, you'll probably have made a plan you forgot
about, or someone just visits you. It’d be a surprise if you said you had not
talked to anyone all day, whether virtually or in real life. But, that’s exactly
what is going on in several countries, most notably in Japan.

If you haven’t heard of the word *hikikomori* before, don’t worry, I hadn’t
either. Just the other day, I was made aware of how our generation is the most
depressed one and I went surfing on the web to check the validity of that
statement. What I found was this ominous term. When one mentions “*hikikomori*”,
the immediate image that comes to mind is a young Japanese man, who has isolated
himself within a bedroom in his parents’ house for years on end, refusing to
speak, interact, or even be seen by anyone – sometimes including his own family.
Meals are brought to the door a few times a day, and garbage and other refuse
are left out in return. He might have started off spending his time playing
video games or chatting online, but those activities have lost their charm long
ago. He now simply stares off into space. *Hikikomori*. The world of perfect
isolation.

Because of the diversity of traits and characteristics accompanying
*hikikomori*, much effort has been put into defining the term in a way that
consolidates the condition that we are examining.  It is a term that describes
both the state and the sufferer of acute social withdrawal. It means the
behaviour in which adolescents and young adults refuse all contact with society
and withdraw from all social activities. First coined by psychiatrist Tamaki
Saito in 1998 in his book *Social Withdrawal – Adolescence Without End*, the
term and the condition gained immense popularity in Japan following several
newspaper articles and television interviews with Saito. The Japanese government
officially defines hikikomori as people who haven't left their homes or
interacted with others for at least six months. They’re often dubbed as
modern-day hermits. The best behavioural definition to date was proposed by Teo
and Gaw in 2010, this definition of *hikikomori* captures the core constructs
associated with the condition in six criteria. For one, most of the day, nearly
every day, is spent at home. The person persistently avoids social situations
and social relationships. They are bound to have experienced distress or
impairment in their normal routine, for a duration of at least six months. The
last, but an important criterion is that the condition is not better explained
by another psychiatric disorder such as social phobia, major depressive
disorders, schizophrenia, or avoidant personality disorder. We define this kind
of hikikomori as “primary hikikomori”, i.e. one manifestation of the hikikomori
phenomenon that cannot be described using current concepts in psychiatric
disease. Primary hikikomori youth do not have any serious diagnosable
psychopathology, yet they are unable to enter society or adapt to their
surroundings. Hikikomori can also include individuals suffering from a variety
of severe mental disorders including affective disorder, anxiety disorder,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, personality disorders, and pervasive
developmental disorders, but they are classified as “secondary hikikomori”.

Originally, hikikomori was simply a general term referring to a condition in
which people withdrew from relationships with others. It was also used as a
psychiatric term describing the symptom of withdrawal in autistic,
schizophrenic, depressive or aged patients. After 1990, hikikomori among youth
received increasing attention from psychiatrists and society-at-large and came
to be used mainly for describing young adults. [According to The New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/15/magazine/shutting-themselves-in.html),
doctors began to observe hikikomori as a social phenomenon around the mid-1980s,
when young men exhibited signs of lethargy, refusing to communicate and spending
most of their time in their rooms. Canadian journalist Michael Zielenziger’s
book *Shutting Out the Sun* and the *New York Times*’ article “Shutting
Themselves In” put the word on the map for the rest of us. The Saito book –
*Social Withdrawal – Adolescence Without End*, in itself, gives us a good idea
about how the word came to be. The hikikomori are rebellious, they need to be
cared for and they’re financially dependent on their parents. It is difficult to
find one cause or reason behind this condition. They are troubled by their
future and are unable to cope with the uncertainty. They may have been triggered
by some trauma; statistics suggest bullying as a major cause. The pressure of it
all: to maintain the family name, to maintain your own dignity, everything may
be a trigger and also a facilitator. The phenomenon can come in various forms: A
person's condition can be so severe that they lack the energy to leave their
sofa to go to the toilet, another could suffer from obsessive-compulsive
disorders so serious that they shower several hours a day or scrub their shower
tiles for hours, some may just play video games all day- "as if it would
tranquilise me." Some just lay in wait for ‘energy’.

A community‐based survey published in 2010 reported that the prevalence of
hikikomori stood at approximately 1.2% of the Japanese population, and in 2016 a
Japanese cabinet report estimated people with hikikomori to be number over half
a million within the age range of 15‐39 years. The country now hopes to identify
older hikikomori and understand the assistance their families need. As
hikikomori grow older and their parents become too elderly to care for them,
questions over their fate will become more urgent. There’s also an implied
consensus that hikikomori are generally men, which might not be true. In fact,
the very number mentioned might be incorrect. Several families don’t like to
accept the reality and call it what it is and instead just say that their
children are being ‘selfish’ for some time. The females, in Japanese culture,
are already supposed to be shy and introverted, so when they shirk away from
social interaction, nobody views it as anything out of the ordinary. What is
absurd is how many parents albeit aware of what’s occurring channel the truth in
a fashion that fits right with their reality. In Japanese, there’s a very famous
saying, "A protruding nail will be hammered down." And that is what may be the
reason why this phenomenon is overtaking the Japanese population. Japan is soon
to face what they call the “2030 problem”. As many with the condition are
getting older and staying withdrawn for longer, the concern is that in 12 years
many hikikomori will approach their
[60s](https://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/article/men-how-to-dress-your-age-60s-and-beyond)
and will have no family to support them – making reintegration into society much
harder. Additionally, as more people withdraw from society and stop working, the
fear is that Japan's economy will also suffer—which it is already doing.  

Of course, when there is a problem, there is a solution. Psychiatrists have
tried to treat hikikomori with individual therapy, group therapy, family
therapy, and family group therapy. Solutions have also come in the form of a
non-profit organisation called New Start, which runs a programme called Rental
Sister, where volunteers visit hikikomori houses. It’s been said that it can
take up to two years of visits to get some cases to leave their homes.
Currently, there are more than fifty government‐funded community support centres
for hikikomori located throughout the prefectures of Japan, providing services
such as telephone consultations for family members, the creation of “meeting
spaces” for affected people, and job placement support. In addition, various
private institutions provide treatment for hikikomori sufferers. However, there
is yet to be a unified evidence‐based method for these public/private
interventions. A four‐step intervention is recommended by the government
guidelines for hikikomori, including family support and first contact with the
individual followed by his/her evaluation; individual support; training through
an intermediate‐transient group situation (such as group therapy); and social
participation trial.

The Japanese sociocultural background has been traditionally permeated by
“*amae”* (accepting over-dependent behaviours) and shame, which may underlie
hikikomori. Parent‐child relationships in Japan have long been considered less
oedipal than in Western societies. They can be marked by an absent father and an
extremely prolonged and close bond with the mother, which may result in
difficulties when it comes to becoming independent. Especially in hikikomori,
the development of basic interpersonal skills during the early stages of life
seems to be insufficient, which can induce vulnerability to stress in later
school/workplace environments and lead to escape from social situations.

Hikikomori‐like cases have recently been reported in other countries of varying
sociocultural and economic backgrounds such as Hong Kong, Oman, was and Spain,
and studies have revealed its existence in India, South Korea, and the US. Thus,
one can say that hikikomori has now crossed the limits of a culture‐bound
phenomenon to become an increasingly prevalent international condition. A major
contributing factor may be the evolution of communication from direct to
increasingly indirect and physically-isolating forms. This is especially the
case for social interactions which hitherto required face‐to‐face contacts in a
mutual physical space but can now occur, at least partially, in a virtual world.
Internet addiction has been reported in several countries. In South Korea, for
example, it is said to be a serious problem among adolescents. It is said that
the “recluse type” Internet addicts do not leave home not only because they are
totally absorbed in the Internet, but also because they have a tendency to avoid
communication with others. In England, young people not in full-time education,
employment or training (NEET) are the subject of policy concern.  This
phenomenon is similar to hikikomori behaviourally in that the NEET do not work
or study. Japan is very different from India so one cannot actually say that
Indians suffer through what can be construed as exactly Hikikomori. However,
there are several similarities. Indians, too are [increasingly
overworked](https://qz.com/india/1030594/indian-millennials-are-overworked-and-sick-of-office-politics/),
with most of the workers [burning
out](https://qz.com/india/1401250/indias-unhealthy-workforce-stands-in-the-way-of-economic-growth/)
from unhealthy conditions. [Indians too are
lonely](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-04/india-obsession-with-sons-millions-of-lonely-men-after-dowry/7903134)
and many millions will, statistically, die alone. This is not to count the
actual problem that the dating culture in India is heavily flawed, and the fact
that most men are unlikely to be well-socialised with women – who watch movies
about romance and start to wonder why their lives don't match up with what's on
screen. Like the Japanese, Indians also have strong family structures, so that
an unemployed youth staying at home and slowly rotting away isn't uncommon.

When we hear the word, we don’t sense that it may be a confusing, cluster-f\*ck
of a phenomenon. There’s no one way for us to discern this or solve it. There
are people who’ve recovered and gone on to get married, some even to their
‘rental-sisters.’ But then there are also hikikomori who have been in this
condition for the last 20 years and do not have any desire to come out of it.
The worst case scenario is that there are more than half a million people who
aren’t even aware of their condition. Animes like *Welcome to NHK* and movies
about Hikikomori may give us a visual on how hikikomori may feel. One of the
quotes from *Welcome to NHK* especially made a mark on me- *“To a hikikomori,
winter is painful because everything feels cold, frozen over, and lonely. To a
hikikomori, spring is also painful because everyone is in a good mood and
therefore enviable. Summer, of course, is especially painful...”* Maika Elan has
an amazing range of
[photographs](https://www.google.com/amp/s/relay.nationalgeographic.com/proxy/distribution/public/amp/photography/proof/2018/february/japan-hikikomori-isolation-society)
which showcase a spectrum of this phenomenon—from the ones who are new, the ones
who have faced it for decades, to the ones who have recovered. It’s worth a
glance and may give you a lot of fodder for thought.

It’s a scary time for all of us. Even though we have measures to have constant
communication, it almost seems like we are stepping away from socialising. And
the more that we do so, the more it seems to do more harm than good. It is true
for all of us that we keep touch in ways that may come as shallow. The world has
always been a machine but the ‘chewing out’ and ‘burning out’ cycle seems to
have increased its pace. It is a positive step that social impairment or
problems with social connections are finally being looked at as health issues.
But that’s the best one can ask for, for now.
