---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Secrets of Sorcery"
author: oindrila.ghosh
cover: Witches.jpg
tags: society
date: 2019-07-26
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/Witches%3B_five_silhouetted_figures._Wellcome_V0048920.jpg/640px-Witches%3B_five_silhouetted_figures._Wellcome_V0048920.jpg
---
The mention of witchcraft is bound to conjure up some image in your mind. Now,
that image could be of Hermione Granger, with her bushy brown hair and dragon
heartstring wand, or that of an old lady with terrible green skin and a long
crooked nose or even Bonnie Bennett from *The Vampire Diaries*. But have you
ever wondered if witches are real and if witchcraft is an actual practice?

To answer that question, yes, witchcraft is not alien to our world. It is,
however, slightly different from the conventional perceptions that surround it.
Historically, witches have always been seen as all-female Satanists whose agenda
behind practising magic is to inflict pain or damage upon others. This
historical perception has resulted in witch-hunts across cultures. Shockingly
enough, mass hysteria being caused by witches is not just a thing of the past.
In 2016, over 400 women in Tanzania were convicted of practising witchcraft and
subsequently killed for performing black magic. Many villages have been
abandoned by its residents out of the fear of being harmed by witches. Every
Tanzanian community, even today, has a witch doctor, whose job is to spot
witches. These ‘witches’ are then killed and their bodies burned. With so many
women dead, the question that arises is this: who is fuelling this witch
hysteria? Tanzania continues to have laws that ban the use of magic, indirectly
lending legitimacy to witch doctors.

Even in India, witch hunts are common. Since 2001, an estimated 2,500 people
have been killed for the practice of witchcraft around the country. In fact,
witch hunters are often highly esteemed by the villagers, who genuinely see them
as rescuers, protecting the village from the hands of evil witches. 

In Romania, the home of Count Dracula, witchcraft is recognised by the current
government. There are many thriving organisations of witches, all government
recognised. Being a witch is considered to be a job. They are employed, not just
by Romanians, but people from all over the globe to cure them of heartbreak,
depression, demonic possession or even to kill or harm enemies. Our Romanian
witches carry out most of their operations online these days and are confident
that their influence is not dying out. Instead, thanks to modern technology, it
is only on the rise. This isn’t how it always was in Romania. In fact, under
Communist rule, witchcraft was banned and punishable by law. And yet, the secret
societies of witches and their practices survived, in hiding from the eyes of
the ruler. Today, witchcraft is commonly accepted by Romanian society.

Witch doctors are very common across the continent of Africa. In South Africa,
commonly among the Zulu, they are of two main types: *Inyanga* and *Sangoma*.
While *Inyanga* practice natural medicine, *Sangoma* practice magic, predict the
future and use various rituals to communicate with ancestors. Many seek out
their expertise and help, without any fear. There are some, however, who
consider these practices unnatural and thus, are afraid of them.

Various countries have come up with innovative ways to deal with the mass
hysteria surrounding witches. In Ghana, nearly a century ago, witch camps were
established to help people who were accused of practising witchcraft by the
locals. Many countries have separate laws altogether to deal with the practice
of magic and those who falsely accuse innocent women of being witches.

In the West, pagan witchcraft or Wicca is on the surge. It is the
fastest-growing religion in the USA and the only truly British religion. The
followers of this exponentially growing religion, born not before 1940, are
self-proclaimed witches who believe in magic. Even though for many, a belief in
magic outside the realm of Harry Potter is a taboo, the growing Wiccan community
is reaching beyond the British Isles with a strength in the millions. However,
contrary to popular belief, they do not just comprise women. Men can be witches
too. Wiccans are not a Satanic cult either. In fact, Wicca takes pride in
worshipping nature and abides by the saying: “An it harm none, do what ye will.”
Their rituals do not involve any kind of sacrifices or dead animals or their
poop, as one might expect. They, however, do draw energy from natural phenomena
like the solstices and equinoxes; a common feature among many such communities.
Most of their spells and incantations are compiled in a book named *The Book of
Shadows*.

The most famous witches that have ever roamed our earth were probably the
witches of Salem, Massachusetts in 1692 (although it is unlikely that they ever
actually practised witchcraft). During the infamous Salem witch trials, some of
the women, like Tituba, confessed to having used black magic to inflict pain and
disease upon young girls in the community. It is possible that the confessions
were a result of community pressure. The witch trials saw the death of several
females and a few males. The accusations, unlike most other witch hunts, weren’t
made by adult males and instead by young girls, who were ill with various
conditions. Between 1482 and 1782, around 100,000 people across Europe were
convicted of witchcraft. Not all of them were burned at the stake, though. Some
were hanged to death. They were generally not persecuted by the Church, contrary
to popular opinion. Although most of the accused were women, in some places,
male witches outnumbered the females. The ratio between male and female witches
stood at 7:3 to in Moscow and 3:1 in Normandy. *Malleus Maleficarum* was
published in 1486 and it quickly became a best-seller, being second only to the
Bible. This book was considered to be the highest authority on how to spot,
interrogate and kill witches and, thus, guided witch hunts for centuries to
come.

If you think sorcery and belief in magic are only a few centuries old, then you
are wrong! It is actually a few millennia old. Ancient Egyptians had many
secrets to hide. Besides building humongous structures like the pyramids, they
also practised magic. Sorcery was an integral part of their lives. The position
of a sorcerer was hereditary and the spells were passed down through
generations. *The Book of the Dead* famously contains various spells to aid one
in the transitional journey to the afterlife. The sorcerers of ancient Egypt
often tried to tackle deadly diseases using magical potions. Though there is no
written record of what actually happened following the administration of such a
cure, it would be stupid, in our science-driven millennial minds to believe that
potions of rats’ tails benefitted anyone. And yet, the sorcerers weren’t ever
condemned or banned from practice. Routine trials of their potions on humans
continued as long as the great civilisation thrived. 

With all the advancement of science comes the rejection of the existence of
magic. Many, however, believe that Egyptian curses might have been real. Let’s
go back to 1922 when Pharaoh Tutankhamen’s tomb was discovered in the Valley of
Kings by Howard Carter. 4 months and 7 days after the opening of the tomb,
George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon, who had financially backed the excavation
team died after a mosquito bite became infected. There have been around 11
deaths following the opening of the tomb. These deaths have been popularly
attributed to the famous Pharaoh’s curse. This curse was placed on tombs and is
believed to affect anyone who disturbs the final resting place of the tomb’s
occupant, especially if it’s a Pharaoh. The curse did not distinguish between
robbers and Egyptologists. However, it is important to note here that Howard
Carter himself died only in 1939, almost two decades later. Hollywood movies
have done a great job of instilling a fear of ancient Egyptian curses among the
masses. The truth, however, is that no one has seen these curses in action.

Witches are surprisingly ubiquitous. But the problem is this: they evolved in
different cultures, separately and yet almost identically. Most cultures have
only female witches. And burning them at the stake almost universally seems to
solve the problem. Although some communities, mostly modern ones, seem to hold
beliefs that witches are helpful, historically, they have often been associated
with famines, death, and other ill-occurrences. Humans have always strived to
decipher mysteries and whenever there are gaps in our understanding, we have
assumed that something supernatural is at play. As our understanding widened, we
rejected pagan explanations of lightning and rainbows and moved on to more
complex schools of thought. Presently, atheism is on the rise. Interestingly
enough, paganism is on the rise too.

While some have dismissed it as a historical practice, in others witchcraft
still thrives as a part of their culture to this day. While some have reduced
witchcraft to a fictional plot device, for many those spells and incantations
hold supernatural powers. It isn’t so much about witchcraft, after all, as it is
about the world’s relationship with it. Dismissing it seems rational. But what’s
intriguing is the existence of the human **urge** to look for magic in a world
that tells you against it, an urge that transcends beyond the modern world
desperation to cling to rationale.
