---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "How Will Arsenal’s New Signings Fit In?"
author: samuel.hogan
cover: emirates-stadium.jpg
pic1: Arsenal-lineup-1.jpg
pic2: Arsenal-lineup-2.jpg
pic3: Arsenal-lineup-3.jpg
pic4: Arsenal-lineup-4.jpg
tags: sports football
date: 2019-08-27
link: https://pixabay.com/es/photos/emirates-stadium-londres-arsenal-1416679/
---
Since the appointment of ex-Arsenal midfielder Edu as the club’s technical
director last month, the Gunners have accelerated their transfer plans after
initially making slow progress towards agreeing deals for the likes of Wilfried
Zaha and Kieran Tierney. 

After the little-heralded signing of Brazillian youngster Gabriel Martinelli,
the window really kicked off with the double announcement of Dani Ceballos on
loan from Real Madrid and the signing of £27 million William Saliba (who was
subsequently loaned back to Saint Étienne) on July 25th. This was soon trumped
by the surprise signing of Nicolas Pépé from Lille, with Arsenal defying the
reports of their £45 million transfer budget by securing the £72 million Ivorian
forward on a 5 year deal. 

Finally, deadline day saw the defence bolstered by the £25 million signing of
left-back Kieran Tierney from Celtic and the shock arrival of veteran
centre-back David Luiz from London rivals Chelsea for £8M on a two year deal. 

With Unai Emery now having added quality at his disposal, the question is how
each of the new boys will fit in.


**William Saliba**

A quick mention of someone Arsenal fans won't get to see for a while; teenage
defender William Saliba whose former club Saint-Etienne insisted on having him
loaned back to them this season. Despite not having played a game for the club,
he has already endeared himself to the Arsenal faithful after he reportedly
snubbed interest from North London rivals Tottenham before opting to join the
Gunners. Once Arsenal fans do get to see him in action, they will see an
accomplished modern centre-back, capable of surging forward from the back whilst
also being a dependable defender, especially in 1v1 situations. His rangy stride
and 6’3 frame make him a physically excellent prospect and when looking at the
market for the likes of Harry Maguire, £28 million could be a bargain for an 18
year old that was starting for the fourth best team in France.  Saliba, along
with Rob Holding and Calum Chambers, looks set to be the future of Arsenal’s
central defence as Sokratis and David Luiz advance into their 30s. 

**Gabriel Martinelli**

The signing of 18 year old Brazillian winger Gabriel Martinelli has
understandably been forgotten about by many after the 5 higher profile signings
that followed. Signed from Brazillian side Ituano for a reported fee of £6
million, Martinelli made his debut in a short cameo against Newcastle last
weekend and, with the sale of Alex Iwobi to Everton, could be in for some
minutes as a rotation player this season. With Pépé and Henrikh Mkhitaryan now
the only established wingers at the club there's a route to the first team for
Martinelli, but he’ll face fierce competition from fellow teenage wingers Reiss
Nelson, Emile Smith-Rowe and Bukayo Saka. 

**Dani Ceballos**

Talented midfielder Dani Ceballos played a crucial role in Spain’s triumph at
the European U21 Championship in Italy this summer, and he will now embark on a
short stint in North London before he likely cements himself as a Real Madrid
regular for years to come. A player as gifted as Ceballos is seldom available on
loan and Arsenal should thank the likes of Luka Modric and Toni Kroos for
blocking his path to regular minutes at the Bernabeu, allowing Arsenal to
acquire a player who will slot right into their first XI.

With Ceballos being the only addition to Arsenal's midfield this summer, it
would be natural to think he would be tasked with replacing the void left by
Aaron Ramsey's departure to Juventus. However, Ceballos is more similar to a few
of Ramsey's former midfield partners: Jack Wilshere and fellow Spaniard Santi
Cazorla. Wilshere and Cazorla both averaged over 2 dribbles a game throughout
their Arsenal careers, but since their departures in 2018 no Arsenal midfielder
averaged more than Mattéo Guendouzi’s 0.7 dribbles a game last season. 

Ceballos averaged 2.7 dribbles per game in his last league season of regular
football at Real Betis in the 2016/17 season and should contribute to some much
needed technical support in the centre of the park, giving Arsenal a ball
carrying outlet from deep to evade pressure. 

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://www.buildlineup.com/" target="_blank"><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic1 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

Ceballos’ immense skill set and versatility means he is capable as a deep-lying
playmaker, a tireless box-to-box CM, or in the number 10 role. Given Ramsey’s
departure and Özil’s recent off-the-pitch adversities, Emery is likely to deploy
Ceballos as the furthest forward midfielder. The 23-year old’s outstanding
performance on his home debut against Burnley earned him rave reviews and the
MOTM award, showcasing his masterful ability as he began the game behind the
striker but switched to a deeper role later in the game. Wherever he plays, the
former Real Betis man is a superb addition to Arsenal’s midfield for this
season.

**Nicolas Pépé**

£72 million man Nicolas Pépé is the most hyped up of Arsenal's summer signings
for good reason; the Ivorian was one of only two players in the top 5 European
leagues to score at least 20 times and record over 10 assists, with the other
being Lionel Messi. Only Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (22) and Alexandre Lacazette
(13) managed more than 6 league goals for Arsenal last season so Pépé’s arrival
should easen the load for the pair while forming a potent 3-pronged attack to
try to match those at Liverpool and Man City. 

Though playing in a weaker league last year, Pépé regularly got into goal
scoring positions and had no hesitation in pulling the trigger, averaging 3.1
shots a game from wide, which is a welcome attribute to a team that had less
shots than Crystal Palace and Southampton last season. Pépé will add value as a
ball carrier and an outlet in the final third, fitting a profile Arsenal have
been missing since the departures of Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, Theo Walcott and
Alexis Sánchez. Pépé’s dribbling stats last season were comparable to those of
Chamberlain’s and Sánchez’s during their time at the Emirates, and if he can
combine that with Walcott and Sánchez’s goal tallies then Arsenal have found a
real gem.

There are, however, questions as to how he will fit into Arsenal's front line
with the likes of Lacazette, Aubameyang and Özil. Based on Unai Emery’s
pragmatic approach last season, it seems unlikely the 4 will line up together
often, especially away from home. Pépé should nevertheless be a fixture on the
team sheet along with Aubameyang due to their counter attacking potential. With
Pépé being a right sided player and Aubameyang, Özil and Lacazette usually
playing centrally it seems difficult to play them all without one of them being
out of position. Özil prefers to operate on the right rather than the left which
could cause Pépé to be forced to the left in pursuit of playing the two
centre-forwards in their natural positions. Needless to say, this would not be
an ideal situation for a player new to the Premier League so it’ll be up to
Emery to manage his team rotations and come up with a fluid attack to get the
best out of all his star forwards. 

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://www.buildlineup.com/" target="_blank"><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic2 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

**Kieran Tierney**

Perhaps the most important Arsenal signings were made on deadline day as the
Gunners brought in some much needed defensive reinforcements. 22-year-old
Tierney has already captained Celtic and Scotland, fulfilling the criteria of
being a leader, a quality that many pundits, such as Gary Neville, have long
been saying Arsenal miss. 

When he recovers from his hernia operation, Tierney will be tasked with fighting
off competition from fellow left-backs Nacho Monreal and Sead Kolašinac to make
the position his own. Tierney predominantly featured in a back 4 at Celtic but
has also played on the left of a back 3 for Scotland, with Liverpool’s Andy
Robertson playing as a wing back ahead of him. Whilst this may just have been a
way to shoehorn two of Scotland’s best players into the same XI, it could be an
option for Arsenal going forward with Sead Kolašinac lining up alongside
Tierney. Nacho Monreal has been deployed in a similar way over the last few
years and the benefit of this would be adding another ball playing centre-half
to bring the ball out from the back, as well as ideally having improved
defensive security with 5 defenders playing. 

Should Tierney start in a back 4, he should act as a good counter balance to
Hector Bellerin on the opposite flank, with the Scot being the more reserved,
technically proficient of the pair whilst Bellerin utilises his athleticism to
make off ball runs and try and get in behind the opposition’s defence. 

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://www.buildlineup.com/" target="_blank"><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic3 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

**David Luiz**

By crossing the divide between West and North London David Luiz followed the
path that several players have trodden in the last 20 years, and if he can
emulate the very reasonable Arsenal career of William Gallas then by all
accounts he should be considered a success. Whilst Gallas was 3 years younger
than Luiz when he left Stamford Bridge for the Emirates, he was a reliable (on
the pitch, at least) performer for the club, playing 142 times for Arsenal and
being named club captain after just one season at the club ahead of established
veterans such as Jens Lehmann and Gilberto Silva. Luiz will likely form an
experienced central defensive partnership with Sokratis, replacing Laurent
Koscielny after the Frenchman’s 9 year residency at the club came to an end. 

<div class="caption" style="text-align: left"><a href="https://www.buildlineup.com/" target="_blank"><img src="assets/images/{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.pic4 }}" style="width:100%"/></a></div>

Luiz entered the Premier League the same year Koscielny did, with both rightly
considered error-prone during their formative years in England before becoming
quality centre-backs. Both are proactive defenders who defend on the front-foot,
frequently stepping up to intercept dangerous passes. They are also both adept
at bringing the ball out of defence and into midfield. However, Luiz is a much
more accomplished passer, completing more through balls than any other Premier
League player last season. If Luiz can replicate that form this season, Pépé and
Aubameyang will thoroughly enjoy themselves in behind opposition backlines.
Luiz’s fine passing repertoire may be best served in a back 3, like in the
2016/17 season where he made the PFA Team of the Year, where he can venture
forward into midfield whilst still having two central defenders to cover for
him. Seeing the Brazillian in an Arsenal shirt will take some getting used to,
but, at £8 million, he could prove to be one of the most astute signings of the
summer.

**Summary**

Arsenal’s window surpassed most people’s expectations and, though nothing is
certain in football, right now has to be tentatively considered a success.
Sanllehi and co. added 5 players ranging from 18-24 years of age along with a 32
year old with years of Premier League experience. Arsenal now have a good mix of
youngsters who can grow together in the next few years whilst also having
several seasoned veterans. The departures of Ramsey, Iwobi, Koscielny and Danny
Welbeck appear to have been well replaced whilst lowering the average squad age
as Arsenal begin a new era. Having said that, we can only review how good a
transfer window has been after seeing how the signings actually perform on the
pitch. There was lots of optimism following Arsenal’s 2016 window in which they
spent around £90 million on Shkodran Mustafi, Granit Xhaka, Lucas Pérez and Rob
Holding though the first 3 have all disappointed to varying degrees. It's now up
to the team to prove the new signings have brought them back to the level where
Arsenal strive to be. However, fans do have reason for optimism as it seems that
after a few tumultuous years with Sven Mislintat and Ivan Gazidis at the helm,
the new management regime are capable of putting together a squad that looks set
to contend.

\*pictures are from [www.buildlineup.com](https://www.buildlineup.com/) and stats are from
[www.whoscored.com](https://www.whoscored.com)
