---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "Why So Bad *rse?"
author: sritama.sen
cover: hermione.jpg
tags: culture
date: 2019-08-02 23:45
link: https://pmcvariety.files.wordpress.com/2017/05/hermione-harry-potter.jpg
---
Raise your hand if you remember the *Frozen* fever that gripped Hollywood - and
pretty much the rest of the world too - in the fall of 2013. If you remember the
glittering reviews and the innumerable times ‘*shattered the glass ceiling*’,
‘*badass princesses*’ or ‘*Oscar worthy*’ flashed before your eyes, till you
were made certain that all of life was meaningless unless you booked first-day,
deluxe seat tickets. If you remember how Disney Renaissance enthusiasts, across
the globe, made sure you knew that Anna and Elsa were *different*, unlike the
*girly-girls* you see in other princess movies. They are *empowered,* with their
M-slit gowns and absence of a romantic wedding for an ending, jot that down. If
you remember how you found yourself at the theatre, semi-guilt tripped into
watching the movie, and finally realised that Jennifer Lee’s retelling of *The
Snow Queen* to be, at most, a well-intentioned but weak tea nod as to what made
a woman ‘badass’.

It’s funny, actually, because when one sits down to look back upon this legacy
of retconning traditionally feminine roles as *weak*, so as to prop up
tomboyish, often desensitised heroines, it’s not just the creators, critics and
audience of present day showbiz media who are to blame. Even adored and revered
works like those of C S Lewis and Rowling, *yes, Rowling*, have often sought to
perpetuate this trope, often under a carefully arranged veneer of offering
simple didactic messages in children’s literature. 

So, let's talk about *these girly-girls*. Not just the predecessor Disney
princesses, no, but the so-called wimpy girls in the media, the featherbrained
airheads, the wet blankets. The ones who can’t and won’t punch assassins, knife
through captors or ride horses into sandstorms. 

For as long as I can remember, it was a struggle for me to find feminine,
unapologetically girly characters in literature and media, who were not
dismissed as prissy, uppity damsels or useless, shivering waifs whose plethora
of interests - sewing, fashion, painting, music, and so forth - were not
dismissed as completely decorative and impractical in the general context of the
storyline. Worse still, if I did manage to find a rare favourite, it was quite
the feat to avoid the barrage of snide remarks from acquaintances, friends, and
even more terrible - overenthusiastic vloggers and literary dissenters who were
sure to hammer home the fact that Sansa Stark and Amy March are, in fact,
horrible sinners doomed to burn in eternal hellfire for their crimes.

Sansa Stark, from George R R Martin’s *A Song of Ice and Fire,* is a textbook
example of the stern fact that a non-tomboyish, non-sexualised female lead can
do nothing without being written off as a wimp. A young, naive lady of merely
eleven*,* when the series begins, Sansa is held captive, forced to endure the
slaughter of her family and shoulders through being a political pawn and a
hostage with kindness, bravery and resilience. She has no dragons and no swords,
she loves lemon cakes, ballads and handsome knights, and is therefore, by
default, painted by the *Game of Thrones* fandom as a wet blanket airhead. She’s
even seen as a veritable ableist demon for not feeling sexually attracted
towards a man thrice her age (and he hails from the house that murdered her
family, no less). She only manages to garner some sympathy after she is violated
in the TV adaptation, a scene that doesn’t even exist in the books. It is hardly
surprising that many male characters in the series, who do much worse, get away
with their misdeeds way easily. *Thrones’* treatment of non-warrior women is
particularly repulsive. Sansa is made to mouth lines showing stoic gratitude
towards her assaulters for teaching her strength, and another female character,
who is often praised for being the snarky cool kid, demurely announces that she
doesn’t plan to be useless during battle, namely ‘sit knitting by the fire’.
Non-canonical lines, inserted because of the directors’ knowledge that they
specifically pander to the audience’s needs and explicit scenes where women
condemn softness and acts of ‘predictable’ ladyship, thereby metamorphosing into
*badasses,* are aplenty.

It is alarming that such scenes, in books and films, are often revered and
portrayed as a sort of phoenix-from-the-ashes-moment, worthy of wolf-whistles
and printed merchandise. Even more alarming is how the notion of empowerment has
grown so utterly distorted that nothing, save for panning people who do not go
against the grain, can properly qualify as a wholesome depiction of strong
women. Why, after all, is knitting by the fire, or working in the kitchen so
problematic? Do soldiers magically grow their uniforms? Does food come to us
without the contribution of those who make it? Demeaning the choice of a woman
to do as she pleases or act as she wants, is but an elaborately twisted route,
ultimately ending in degrading womanhood itself.

When C S Lewis published *The Last Battle* in 1956 the final instalment of his
Narnia series, there was quite a bit of hue and outcry over his decision to
close the gates of Narnia upon Susan Pevensie, the older, calmer, more beautiful
and ladylike of the Pevensie sisters. After her family is killed in a car
accident and the souls of her siblings find eternal refuge in Narnia, (a clear
metaphor of an Eden-like realm) Susan is left alone, literally and figuratively
locked out of heaven, her dismissal most summarily executed by Lewis in a couple
of lines: 

“*My sister Susan,” answered Peter shortly and gravely, “is no longer a friend
of Narnia.*” 

Why is this a problem? Because it’s not so much a question of *what* her fate
was, as it is of *why* she deserved such a peremptory conclusion:

“*Oh Susan!” said Jill. “She’s interested in nothing nowadays except nylons and
lipsticks and invitations. She always was a jolly sight too keen on being
grown-up*...” 

Ah, yes, of course. Dresses and makeup, wanting to socialise and have peers;
what could be more heinous a crime for an adolescent? Surely, a crime worthy of
being unpardonable, in a book replete with Biblical imagery and repeated
emphasis on the need to keep the innocence in children untainted, with a fervour
that would make Blake proud. If you are shaking your head at this, slightly
unconvinced, here’s a snippet from Lewis himself, where he makes it clear that
our lipstick-wearing, nylon-loving lady is not enjoying the fruits of the
Promised Land anytime soon:

“*The books don't tell us what happened to Susan. She is left alive in this
world at the end, having by then turned into a rather silly, conceited young
woman. But there's plenty of time for her to mend and perhaps she will get to
Aslan's country in the end... in her own way*...”

Even while he offers us a glimmer of hope, one can’t help but wince at the last
lines. ‘Plenty of time for her to mend’ what, exactly? What is so indisputably
repulsive about Susan craving extremely normal things, for a girl of her age?
Why is there an immediate need to demonise a female character who chooses to
beautify herself with makeup and pretty clothes?

Since then, Susan’s crisis has attracted plenty of sympathetic voices from the
literary community: Philip Pullman, Neil Gaiman, J K Rowling - to name a few,
with Gaiman even creating a sort of spinoff short story with a very Susan-esque
protagonist, giving her a much-needed voice and agency. Still, the older
Pevensie sister remains an outcast of Narnia, a scarring reminder of what
happens to girls who dare to be...well, just be. The ugly implications of
girlish existence in Lewis’ ramrod world of old laws and deep magic are proof
enough.

Speaking of Rowling, an interesting and somewhat ironic fact is that while the
*Harry Potter* series, on the forefront, seems chock-full of strong,
three-dimensional female characters, there is something slightly problematic in
the way she treats any character that teeters dangerously into *girly-girl*
territory. Two classic examples are Cho Chang, Harry’s first girlfriend, who is
constantly vilified for being ‘too emotional’ and too mopey over her dead
boyfriend, and Fleur Delacour, who while she gets a much better conclusion, is
still written off as the shallow dumb blonde, with a subpar performance in the
Triwizard tournament where she’s the only female competitor. Cho is eventually
cast aside for Ginny, whom Harry considers wonderful because she is ‘rarely
weepy’. Constant misogynistic and slightly racist jabs are directed at Fleur by
none other than Molly and Ginny Weasley, two of the most glorified and
celebrated women in Harry’s life. Not even the minor characters escape
judgement: the Patil twins and Lavender Brown, bubblier and more extroverted
classmates of Hermione, are often reduced to nothing but cartoonish caricatures
vying for Harry and Ron’s affections in the movies. Besides the evocation of
unpleasant racial overtones, it’s something to think about, really. Where does
mild, school cliché-centric humour end and perpetual bracketing-and-bashing of
softness and *generic* girlishness begin?

My personal favourite though, is the much-hated Amy March from *Little Women*.
Amy’s case is particularly interesting because Alcott never meant to malign her,
no, it’s the audience, unable to look past their ‘JO x LAURIE ENDGAME’ stupor,
who miss the whole point of Amy’s arc - the resourcefulness in her choice to
work within the conventions of traditional femininity instead of rebelling
against it, the raw honesty in her desire as an impoverished girl to enjoy
pretty material pleasures, the flaws and petty mistakes she succumbs to, because
she is not written to be liked, she is written to be *real.* Jo’s struggles are
very earthy and very honest, and her staunch refusal to fit in and fulfil
societal expectations is admirable, but Amy’s willingness to maintain a sort of
harmony with her community and work towards self-fulfilment...how is that, in
any way, less gratifying?

And for that matter, what do all these endless debates actually uncover? What
does this hollow classification system of girls into *badasses* and
*girly-girls* entail?

The answer is uncertain, but it’s surely not an easy one. One cannot simply go
for a shallow deconstruction of the *not-like-other-girls syndrome* without
looking into why this syndrome had to arise at all. And then one finds that the
root of this bizarre phenomenon lies in square one: the *trivialisation* of
tenderness in girls and women, leading many to think that female voices and
characters might not be taken seriously unless they are stripped away of all
that could possibly hint at compassion and clemency. While Katniss Everdeen,
Merida and the warrior heroines of some of the later Young Adult franchises may
have arrived at exactly the right moment to prevent oversaturation of the market
by the same kind of feminine representation, the boomerang effect that arose out
of this is girls, in the younger demographic, seeking validation by rejecting
and loudly denouncing traits that could possibly mark them as girly. This
denunciation shows an almost vitriolic hatred in harmless things, marked out as
extremely feminine motifs: anything pink and/or coded as *princessy* being the
commonest examples. It’s alarming, it’s potentially harmful that the psyche of
girls is shaped by what they *shouldn’t* be as opposed to what they prefer to
be, it leans towards the patriarchy having the last laugh at the end.

Most importantly, as hackneyed as this sounds, there is nothing more
reproachable than the actions and behaviour of one woman being tainted so as to
glorify another. Feminism and badassery don’t spring *just* from elaborate fight
sequences or by being completely stone-cold or perpetually displeased and in a
fighting stance. Yes, female characters so portrayed are valid, beautiful, even
necessary. But they are not the beginning and end of all that’s marvellous and
awe-inspiring about women. It’s definitely heartening to see a much more
positive and varied portrayal of sharp and brilliant women in contemporary
media, who don’t always depend on brawn or magic to achieve unanimous approval,
take the famous Elle Woods (*Legally Blonde)* for example, a wonderful
subversion of the dumb blonde stereotype.

So while we praise Arya for knifing through her tormentors, we cannot forget
Sansa, who comforts children and women with songs during a battle; we can
celebrate angry, rebellious spirits without coming for gentle, tranquil hearts.
We can cherish both sides of the spectrum. We can appreciate that some
rebellions happen quietly, in utter tranquillity, glossed with pink and flowers.
We can, for once, not let the patriarchy win.

And maybe, just maybe at the end, Susan, the outcast of Narnia, no longer a
powerful queen but just gloriously and heartbreakingly a human girl, will have
the last laugh.
