---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "The Picture of Dorian Gray – Final Thoughts from the Composer’s Desk"
author: olly.bowes
cover: assets/images/Dorian.jpg
tags: culture
date: 2019-03-07 03:30
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/64/Opium_smoking_1874.jpg
---
It strikes me that whenever I announced to people that I had set about writing
an opera, I never actually received that reaction I expected. I was certain I’d
be met with derision – “What makes you think YOU can write one, Bowes?” Up to
the point that I began working on *Dorian*, I had only really written choral
music and a few songs. My only forays into purely instrumental music consisted
of a piano quintet I concocted for my A-level coursework, an arrangement of a
school song (*Bedford by the River* – won a cash prize for it, to be fair), and
a frankly ridiculous setting of the *Requiem Mass*, which I hope will never be
performed in its current state. Yet, the reaction, especially when I told
everyone of the subject-matter of this opera, Wilde’s seminal novella *The
Picture of Dorian Gray*, was unanimously positive. A few more knowledgeable
friends asked whether it had been done before, to which I ask: how many versions
of *Faust* or *Romeo and Juliet* are there? Answer: frankly too many, not that I
wouldn’t consider doing a *Faust*-related one at some point – indeed, one can
see *Dorian* itself as a Faustian tale. Nevertheless, the reception to the idea
was that I ought to push on, and so I did. Thus, I have reached the end of the
compositional process (barring edits after the fact) and I have more than enough
time to sit and worry about the show. Which I do – all too often, in fact. And
which also led me to write this pair of articles for *The Pangean*.

At the end of my [last
article](https://thepangean.com/The-Picture-of-Dorian-Gray), I had reflected on
the music of the first Act, but I came to realize after its publication that I
had failed to actually discuss compositional process, which I suppose is far
more interesting than simply taking you, arm-in-arm, on a promenade through what
you will, in just a matter of months, be able to hear for yourself. Therefore,
while I will still move chronologically through the final Act, wouldn’t you
rather hear about how I did the composing, rather than what composing I did?

In all honesty, I have not been composing for long enough to have entirely
unified a process. Different pieces require different things from me. Some
pieces can go from just the little scribblings in a notebook straight into my
computer, where I will transform them from the idea into an actual functioning
piece. Others, such as the song-cycle I am currently working on, *Crow*, needed
to be mapped out in full-score on paper first, and in ink – it felt particularly
necessary for *Crow*, as it lent a sparseness to the writing that was very
helpful (although, I must say that it has been an absolute b\*tch to write up on
my computer.) These are the two ends of a sliding scale upon which *Dorian* sat
somewhere in the middle. Or, in fact, off of either end. Some scenes, such as
the theatre scene in Act One went straight from my brain into the computer, as
the nature of the scurrying accompaniment made it a real bore to hand-write,
without the joy of copy-and-paste and editing after the fact. Others, such as
the entire last scene, were almost entirely drafted on paper first and then
written up – although I admit that at least part of the reason for hand-writing
the entire last scene was that my laptop was on the blink and I was 3,000 miles
from home. But, it keeps the romantic notion of the composer scribbling away
with pen and ink alive, so I’ve got to keep up appearances.

And so we come to the last Act. Although much of this was drafted last, the
prelude to the first scene was, in fact, finished long before most of Act One,
as it gave me, frankly, a nice compositional break from the Prologue. My
librettist Jamie and I had to come up with some way to symbolise several years
of debauchery that the audience missed by swanning out for their interval drinks
in the bar. I assume that the debauched years will be lived through in the minds
of our performers during this interval; it would be nicely ‘method’ of them. But
how to illustrate it in music? I gave the audience a brief, slow moment in which
to mourn Basil and Sybil, both brutally killed at the end of the first Act,
before setting about the musical debauchery. Decadence and wild abandon are
often achieved in music through the use of rowdy dances. Ravel was a master of
this, especially in the finale of *La Valse*, or consider Stravinsky’s *Rite of
Spring* – the poor girl dances herself to death at the end. But, as those of you
who know me can testify, I am no dancer. So how should I go after the same
effects? It’s actually fairly obvious: the thing that makes a dance a dance is
the rhythm, with which I have very little issue (getting the legs to do what
they're told on the other hand…). Therefore, I took one of the rhythmic motifs
that described the den of iniquity that was the theatre in Act One, and laid it
underneath a pulsating Yoruba-inspired cross-rhythm from a pair of drums to
create a heady mix of open fifths and driving rhythms that symbolises Dorian’s
embracing of Harry’s lessons.

Similarly, the segue into the first scene, which itself takes place in an opium
den, takes its influences from Debussy’s use of the quartal harmony to lend an
air of intentionally fake orientalism, with added xylophonic twinkling. This is
undercut by the following chorus ‘number’ – Dorian, his mind full of a romantic
poems, hallucinates that the other patrons of this establishment all begin
singing, in French, about the beauty of Venice, at odds with both the Chinese-y
music of the den, as well as with the general dinginess of London at the end of
the 19th century. And, as a unifying feature of this scene, the music is still
Debussy-inspired. With a French poem, especially by a poet such as Théophile
Gautier, one can’t not look to Debussy, I feel.

<blockquote>
“Sur une gamme chromatique, <br>

Le sein de perles ruisselant, <br>

La Vénus de l’Adriatique, <br>

Sort de l’eau son corps rose et blanc.”
</blockquote>

The remainder of the first scene is dominated by the one appearance of Sybil’s
brother James, who rages like a bull in a china-shop while attempting to pursue
Dorian. His aria was one for which I did the most planning – James had to be
able to arrive on the scene and make enough of an impact to make him feel like a
threat for the remainder of the show, despite not having been seen in the
previous acts. Thus, he demanded a full-on show-stopper of an aria. What makes
music sound angry? It’s much the same as that which makes music sound debauched,
as both violent anger and wild abandon stray from the comfortable emotional
spectrum. Thus, I focused on rhythm again. I wrote out his words, some of the
most violent I have read in Wilde, and began to speak them to myself over and
over again. Individual lines became something of a rapid chant, savagely
thumping away, until I was able to write down specific rhythms I had associated
with them. The aria became very caballetic, with compound rhythms driving
underneath the singer’s howling. And then I worked out the melody. It’s not
greatly complicated, just arpeggiating through the chords underneath. Far more
important is the tessitura: James was, in my head, a Bass, albeit one with a
very solid top range, and this aria is one that exploits it, as I push the
singer to the upper extreme, bellowing away in righteous fury, while the
orchestra churns away tempestuously around him, until he disappears into the
night to hunt his sister’s ‘killer’.

In the second scene, the last scene to be written, and not appearing in the
novella, we return to Lord Henry’s house. Yet the house has a much darker aspect
than when we had seen it in the first Act. For one thing, it is about three in
the morning. But, more importantly, Henry’s wife has made a decision that will
cast a pall on the man for the rest of the show. To give a sense of this
foreboding, I searched back through her brief appearance in Act One for melodies
associated with Lady Victoria, finally picking the languorous downwardly
meandering tune she uses to describe her enjoyment of pianists to manipulate
into a mournful prelude to the scene, descending through the strings in a canon,
before a quote from Tchaikovsky’s *Eugene Onegin* foreshadows the fateful letter
that she has written for Harry. Harry’s music, on the other hand, is much
brighter and jolly – he’s drunk, and he sings in a drunkenly twisted patter,
while Victoria drums up the courage to tell him she is leaving. When she finally
pours forth all her upset, we move from twisted patter into a driving
baroque-esque raging, reminiscent of Handel’s more overtly furious moments, most
particularly Dejanira’s aria, *Where Shall I Fly* from *Hercules,* in which the
overwrought Dejanira is driven mad by guilt, having caused the death of her
god-like husband. But, for me, there was a deeper meaning behind the baroque
façade that I had Victoria put up.

Jamie and I discussed this scene at great length, deliberating over how to stop
Victoria from seeming like a shrewish, nagging wife, and more like the bright,
free woman she ought to be. Neither of us understand women (or, in my case,
people in general) as well as we’d like to think, I suspect, but I truly believe
we have drawn here a very human event: Victoria pretends, in her baroque raging,
that her divorce is for all sorts of moral and societal reasons, citing Harry’s
insalubrious behaviour as more than enough reason for her to leave him. Yet, she
ultimately confesses that this is a pretence. She married him because that
behaviour, fuelled as it was by his Byronic intelligence, was highly attractive.
However, he has now ceased being Byronic, and is simply being indulgent and
destructive whilst ignoring her as a wife. All the romance has gone from his
behaviour. It’s a far more interesting character that Jamie has drawn through
this dichotomy than what could have been there: a shrew reprimanding a wastrel
for his wastefulness.

We finally return to Dorian, still suffering shock from his encounter with James
Vane, on retreat in the country. We find him alone in the grounds of the Duchess
of Monmouth’s house, musing on the events of the previous few days. For this
scene, we took full advantage of the non-linear storytelling we had introduced
with the appearance of Sybil at the end of Act One. There is, in Wilde’s
original, a scintillating scene of witty repartee between Harry and several
other pillars of society after a dinner hosted by the Duchess. However, in
streamlining the show, we feared we would lose this in order to focus more
clearly on Dorian himself. That is, we feared until one of us realised we could
just do another pseudo-flashback, as Dorian recalls the events of the previous
evening. Therefore, we have another moment of lighthearted patter from Harry,
who is joined by the chorus – I felt I was channelling all of my love for *Die
Fledermaus* or even the great Victorian partnership of Gilbert and Sullivan,
trying to create some feeling of effervescence in the midst of the terror that
is consuming Dorian here. This continues into the next big chorus moment, after
the flashback, when these society lords and ladies enter the field in which
Dorian has been sitting in order to go shooting, singing words by Rudyard
Kipling, from his *Verses on Games*:

<blockquote>
“Peace upon Earth, Goodwill to men” <br>

           So greet we Christmas Day! <br>

       Oh, Christian, load your gun and then <br>

           Oh, Christian, out and slay.”
</blockquote>

This joyful entrance is set to a reharmonisation of Sullivan’s tune Noel, known
to most of us as *It Came Upon A Midnight Clear.* At the same time, something of
RVW’s *Antiphon* or Bruckner’s *Te Deum* was never far from my mind, in terms of
the orchestration. It may have become obvious to you that I am always thinking
of other things to relate my music to. It is a problem I run into occasionally –
am I being influenced, which is fine: music does not exist in a vacuum; or am I
simply copying? Quoting things is fine, especially in such a long work as this
(there are many quotes in *Dorian*, most of which I have not pointed out, but
all of which make me irrationally, self-indulgently happy), but copying is not
just plagiaristic but, personally, pointless – even if my original thought, at
the inception of this opera, was that “I wish Britten had written a Dorian
Gray.” Hopefully, my style has become distinct enough from just “a kid copying
Britten”. Hopefully.

Moving on, there is so much to point to in the final scene. Therefore, I will
keep my comments limited to two particular moments. In this last scene, we see
Dorian and Harry finally alone in Dorian’s living room. Dorian is by now
incredibly stressed – Vane hunted him all the way to the Duchess’ estate, and,
in trying to creep up on him, was shot by one of the Lords on their morning
shoot – which Dorian took as a terribly ill omen. Returning to London, Harry has
been keeping tabs on his young protégé, making sure the fear and stress doesn’t
get to him. Therefore, he ups the levels of inane babble. The treatment of his
final moment of inane babble is possibly one of my favourite bits of composition
I’ve done to date. I say my composition, but actually, Harry’s last aria is
founded entirely upon a piece by Alexander Scriabin, who, although I mention him
very infrequently, is one of my favourite composers, if only for his absolutely
insane theories about the end of the world (and attempts to bring said end
about) and his pretence at having synaesthesia, which he tried to use to create
a light-organ or ‘*clavier à lumières*’ with which to compose for the
colour-spectrum―which is, I think you’ll agree, fairly bonkers. Nevertheless, I
got it into my head to use this moment at the end of the piece to highlight
musically a big change in Dorian: before we meet Dorian in the Prologue, we hear
him from offstage, playing a snippet from Schumann’s *Waldszenen*, a very calm,
nature-themed work for the piano – a piece of innocence, if you will. But now,
at the end of the evening, many years later for the two remaining characters,
Dorian returns to the piano to ignore Harry’s inanities, and plays Scriabin’s
*Nocturne* for the left hand. This highlights a change in Dorian in several
ways. Firstly, it is significantly more technically and harmonically challenging
than the Schumann, in part because it is specifically for the left hand, but
also because of Scriabin’s tense, dense harmonic language, which is
significantly more discordant and much less innocent than Schumann’s. Moreover,
Schumann published *Waldszenen* in 1849, whereas the *Nocturne* was composed in
1894; there is nearly half a century of musical development, pushing the
boundaries of tonality and taste, between the two, indicative of the passage of
time within the show, perhaps, and certainly indicative again of the corruption
of Dorian’s innocence over that time.

Finally, we come to the grand collapse that is the ending. I shan’t spoil the
last few pages by discussing exactly how the show closes, because that would
undoubtedly be a travesty. What I would like to discuss is the allegorical use
of the story of *Belshazzar* in the closing moments. In my first plan of the
end, I had refused the idea of an off-stage chorus as too ‘operatic’ for an
intimate close to this show, much too close to the end of *Don Giovanni* or the
countless other shows that copied that dramatic close, with the lecher dragged
into hell by an immaterial chorus. However, one chat with Jamie transformed my
conception entirely: I was not overly keen on my first draft’s ending, and he
wrote some new words to close the show – they were splendid. In a tangent to
Dorian’s flashback or his vision of Sybil, Jamie brought up an off-stage chorus,
symbolic perhaps of Dorian’s frantic brain or of heavenly judgement (I’m
inclined to think one particular way, but others may disagree), singing the
*“writing on the wall”* that appeared at *Belshazzar’s Feast*: “*Mene Mene Tekel
Upharsin*” or, as Jamie put it, “*Thou art in the balances, and art found
wanting.*” Dorian, in his desperate bid to redeem himself after his years of
immorality, cannot help but hear these words, directly paralleling the
condemnation that is his own portrait hanging upon the wall. Thus, in
composition, I had to avoid not just the links to Don Giovanni but also to
Walton’s own *Belshazzar’s Feast*, again a favourite work of mine. Fortunately,
context saved me here, as the chorus slowly makes itself known, crescendoing slowly to become just about audible on-stage, before making a final fortissimo
statement and leaving Dorian to contemplate his fate – with little over a minute
left of the opera.
