---
layout: post
current: post
navigation: True
class: post-template

title: "THE MIDDLE INCOME TRAP And How India Must Avert It"
author: riya.kaul
cover: Gorakhpur_Junction_railway_station.jpg
tags: economics
date: 2019-07-02 12:40
link: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/64/Gorakhpur_Junction_railway_station.jpg
---
While the *Mahatyohar* (Read: General Elections) of the Indian nation concluded
with a staggering majority for the incumbent BJP, it was immediately followed by
the official revelation of certain important economic indicators that were
perhaps obscured in a mist of uncertainty during the election campaign.
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate was revealed to be at a four-decade high of
6.1% while the GDP growth rate of 2019 Q1 has dropped to nearly 5.8% after a
decline in the consumption expenditure for automobile and real estate, which
explains the recent 0.2% reduction in the IMF growth projections for India as
compared to its previous assessment in January. The growth concerns have put
more interest rate cuts by the Reserve Bank of India on the radar, and have
pushed its stance from neutral to accommodative. And while all these deviations
can be credited to the global slowdown that is being projected for 2019 as a
part of the generic economic cycle, for emerging nations like India this could
indicate the end to an era of rapid economic convergence.

Recently, amidst the chaos of the Indian elections, Rathin Roy, Director of the
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, highlighted a bipartisan issue
of long term stagnation that the Indian economy might soon have to confront. He
identified that the long term growth of the nation is primarily spurred by what
the top 10% income bracket of the population consumes. This was good enough to
lift India to the group of lower-middle income nations back in 2008 when the per
capita income rose above \$1005 for the first time. But now, this group has
become a major hindrance to reaching the upper-middle-income bracket that ranges
from \$3,956 to \$12,235 per capita. In order to cross this threshold, the
economy must witness a structural transformation of the non-luxury good
industries, on which the majority of the Indian population depends. Roy states
that while aspects like infrastructure, microfinance, etc. are being dealt with
by the government's *PM Awas Yojana* and *PM Mudra Yojana* schemes respectively,
it is agriculture that clearly needs to undergo a proper revival to ameliorate
the productivity of the most basic non-luxury good; foodgrain, for which we’re
becoming increasingly dependent. Other aspects like technology and human capital
development require immediate attention for escaping the Middle Income Trap that
we’re heading into. 

The Middle Income Trap is an economic phenomenon that states how a poor nation
makes significant progress on its way to becoming a middle-income nation but
then finds it harder to take the shape of a fully developed, high-income nation.
This phenomenon is more frequent than one would assume. Only 13 of the 101
nations deemed to be middle-income countries in the 1960's had achieved
high-income levels by 2011. The failure of the rest of the nations is primarily
attributed to the rising domestic wages, failure to invest in human capital,
lack of innovation and issues with macroeconomic stability. While the latter is
comparatively under control and any recent macroeconomic discrepancies have been
exogenous to the powers of the central bank, the remaining three are extremely
crucial yet underrated issues in the Indian economy. 

Roy identifies that labour-intensive business investments are increasingly being
channelled towards nations like Bangladesh, even though their wages are similar
to those of East Indian states like Bihar, Jharkhand, etc. But there, the labour
is scarce due to mass migrations towards the western states where minimum wages
are much higher, a policy which had contributed to the early popularity the
current PM Modi, during his tenure as the Chief Minister of the western state of
Gujarat. Although it is difficult to revert such populist policies, the issue of
high wages has the ability to resolve itself in time, as the nation’s
demographic structure changes, with more people contributing to the labour
supply. 

As for the development of human capital, the current share of education-related
expenditure in India's Union Budget is a mere 3%, much lower than the minimum 6%
required for the basic functioning of the education system, let alone its
restructuring. Innovation was encouraged through government initiatives like
*Startup India*, which badly backfired as the government failed to encourage
investors by perpetuating the regressive Angel Tax, which charged venture
capitalists on any amount invested over and above the government’s faulty
valuation of the startups. 

An observation similar to Rathin Roy’s was made in the Economic Survey of
2017-18, which identified the threat of a ‘Late Converger Stall’ that India will
have to tackle on its way to the upper-middle-income status. Economic
convergence, which is the process of developing economies catching up with the
developed ones, is divided into phases. There have been early convergers like
Japan and South Korea, who managed to take advantage of their cheap labour and
efficient productivity in time, and then there are late convergers like India,
who did not open their economy to global opportunities until the eleventh hour
and must now bear the consequences. 

The Economic Survey identified the major headwinds that were absent for the
early convergers and could now lead to a growth stall for the late convergers.
Hyper globalisation repudiation due to a growing sentiment of protectionism was
absent during the early convergers period, which gave Japan, China, and South
Korea, an average export boost of over 15% during their convergence period. The
global trade-to-GDP ratio is on a decline since 2011, which, from a policy
perspective, means that the late convergers must now focus more on enhancing
private investments to boost growth. Another factor identified by the survey was
the thwarted structural transformation due to wrongly channelising resources
from low productivity sectors to marginally more productive sectors rather than
high productivity sectors. Sectors like finance, technology, and other
professional services must be tapped for overcoming the stagnation.
Additionally, climate-change-induced agricultural stress and regression of human
capital are also some of the major issues that need to be addressed with greater
urgency.

Although the middle-income trap can be avoided by both increasing domestic
demand or by boosting exports, India can only prioritise the former because
becoming an export-led economy would imply a current account surplus and capital
account deficit, and that would curb the FDI to the nation, which is evidently
undesirable for an Emerging Market Economy (EME). The policy mix of the
politically right government has, for the most part, comprised economically
left-leaning schemes combined with cleverly constructed, investment conducive
foreign policy. But that is not enough. India is one of the prime investment
destinations among its fellow EMEs, and we must fully take advantage of that
before the preferences, as they inevitably will, shift to the African nations,
for capital is faithful to none.
